The Project Gutenberg eBook of Music and Life, by Thomas Whitney Surette

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Music and Life
       A study of the relations between ourselves and music

Author: Thomas Whitney Surette

Release Date: May 08, 2021 [eBook #65285]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Linda Cantoni, Charlene Taylor, Martin Pettit and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC AND LIFE ***

MUSIC AND LIFE

A STUDY OF THE RELATIONS BETWEEN OURSELVES AND MUSIC

BY

THOMAS WHITNEY SURETTE

AUTHOR OF “_The Development of Symphonic Music_” AND (WITH D. G. MASON)
OF “_The Appreciation of Music_”

[Illustration: Decoration]

BOSTON AND NEW YORK HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY The Riverside Press
Cambridge 1917




COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY COMPANY
COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY THOMAS WHITNEY SURETTE

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

_Published March 1917_




ACKNOWLEDGMENT


The author desires to express his thanks to the Editor of the _Atlantic
Monthly_ for permission to use, as a part of this book, material from a
series of articles that appeared in his magazine.




CONTENTS

[Illustration: Decoration]


_INTRODUCTION_


CHAPTER I

_WHAT IS MUSIC?_

  I. DISTINCTION BETWEEN MUSIC AND THE OTHER ARTS        1

 II. THE ELEMENTS OF MUSIC                               6

III. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF MUSIC                          13

 IV. “BEAUTY IS TRUTH, TRUTH BEAUTY”                    18


CHAPTER II

_MUSIC FOR CHILDREN_

  I. TRAINING THE SENSE FOR BEAUTY                      26

 II. THE VALUE OF SINGING                               36

III. CURRENT METHODS OF TEACHING                        41

 IV. WHAT SHOULD CHILDREN SING?                         45

  V. THE FALLACY OF THE INEVITABLE PIANOFORTE LESSON    50

 VI. THE REAL GOAL                                      56


CHAPTER III

_PUBLIC SCHOOL MUSIC_

  I. IDEALS OF PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATION                  61

 II. THE VALUE OF MUSIC IN PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATION      68

III. FALSE METHODS OF TEACHING                          74

 IV. GOOD OR BAD MUSIC                                  83

  V. ATTEMPTS AT REFORM                                 91

 VI. OTHER ACTIVITIES IN SCHOOL MUSIC                   97


CHAPTER IV

_COMMUNITY MUSIC_

  I. MUSIC BY PROXY                                    103

 II. OUR MUSICAL ACTIVITIES                            108

III. WHAT WE MIGHT DO                                  117

 IV. AN EXPERIMENT                                     129

  V. MUSIC AS A SOCIAL FORCE                           134


CHAPTER V

_THE OPERA_

  I. WHAT IS OPERA?                                    145

 II. OPERA IN THE OLD STYLE                            149

III. WAGNER AND AFTER                                  158

 IV. WHEN MUSIC AND DRAMA ARE FITLY JOINED             166

  V. OPERA AS A HUMAN INSTITUTION                      175


CHAPTER VI

_THE SYMPHONY_

  I. WHAT IS A SYMPHONY?                               179

 II. HOW SHALL WE UNDERSTAND IT?                       187

III. THE MATERIALS OF THE SYMPHONY                     196

 IV. TONE COLOR AND DESIGN                             210


CHAPTER VII

_THE SYMPHONY_ (_Continued_)

  I. THE UNITY OF THE SYMPHONY                         216

 II. STAGES OF ITS DEVELOPMENT                         226

III. CHAMBER MUSIC AS AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMPHONIES    234

 IV. THE PERFORMER AND THE PUBLIC                      237


Chapter VIII

CONCLUSION                                             241




INTRODUCTION


During the last twenty or thirty years there has been an enormous
increase in the United States of what may be called “institutional”
music. We have built opera houses, we have formed many new orchestras,
and we have established the teaching of music in nearly all our public
and private schools and colleges, so that a casual person observing all
this, hearing from boastful lips how many millions per annum we spend
on music, and adding up the various columns into one grand total, might
arrive at the conclusion that we are really a musical people.

But one who looks beneath the surface--who reflects that the thing
we believe, and the thing we love, that we do--would have to do a
sum in subtraction also; would have to ask what music there is in
our own households. He would find that in our cities and towns only
an infinitesimal percentage of the inhabitants sing together for the
pleasure of doing so, and that the task of keeping choral societies
together is as difficult as ever; that the music we take no part in,
but merely listen to, is the music that flourishes; that our operatic
singers, the most highly paid in the world, come to us annually from
abroad and sing to us in languages that we cannot understand; that,
in short, while music flourishes, much of it is bought and little of
it is home-made. The deduction is obvious. This institutional music
is a sort of largess of our prosperity. We are rich enough to buy the
best the world affords. We institute music in our public schools and
display our interest in it once a year--at graduation time. We see
that our children take “music lessons” and judge the result likewise
by their capacity to play us occasionally a very nice little piece.
Men, in particular,--all potential singers, and _very much needing to
sing_,--look upon it as a slightly effeminate or scarcely natural and
manly thing to do. Music is, in short, too much our diversion, and too
little our salvation.

And to form a correct estimate of the value of our musical activities
we should need also to consider the quality of the music we hear; and
this, in relation to the sums we have been doing, might make complete
havoc of our figures, because it would change their basic significance.
For if it is bad music, the more we hear of it the worse off we are.
If a city spends thirty thousand dollars a year on bad public-school
music, it is a loser to the extent of some sixty thousand dollars. If
your child is painfully acquiring a mechanical dexterity (or acquiring
a painful mechanical dexterity) in pianoforte playing and is learning
almost nothing about music, you lose twice what you pay and your child
pays twice for her suffering. What is called “being musical” cannot
be passed on to some one else or to something else; you cannot be
musical vicariously--through another person, through so many thousand
dollars, through civic pride, through any other of the many means we
employ. Being musical does not necessarily lie in performing music; it
is rather a _state_ of being which every individual who can hear is
entitled by nature to attain to in a greater or less degree.

Such are the musical conditions confronting us, and such are the
possibilities open to us. My purpose is, therefore, to suggest ways
of improving this situation, and of realizing these possibilities;
and, as a necessary basis for any such suggestions, to consider first
the nature of music itself. Is it merely a titillation of the ear?
Are Mozart, Beethoven, and Schubert merely purveyors of sweetmeats?
Does music consist in an astonishing dexterity in performance? Is
it, as Whitman says, “what awakes in you when you are reminded by
the instruments”? Or has it a life of its own, self-contained,
self-expressive, and complete? These questions need to be asked--and
answered--before we can formulate any method of improving our musical
situation.

They are not asked. We blindly follow conventional practices; we
make little effort to fathom the many delightful problems which
every hearing of music presents to us; we submit to being baffled
every time we hear an orchestra play; we take no forward step on the
road to understanding. Beethoven was a heart, a mind, a will, and an
imagination; we, in listening, absorb his emotion and hardly anything
else. His grotesque outbursts make us uncomfortable, as would a
solecism of behavior. His strange, bizarre, uncouth, and extraordinary
themes, every one of which fits perfectly into his plan, leave us
wondering what he intends. His sentiment, which is always _relative_ to
his humor or his roughness, we understand only by itself.

Our children, after years of conventional music study, are finally
taken to hear an orchestral concert. A great man is to speak to them.
He does not use words. What he has to say issues forth in a myriad of
sounds, now soft, now loud, now fast, now slow. This that the child
hears is what is called _music_, seemingly a mere succession of sounds,
really a vision of what a great man has seen of all those inner things
of life which only he can truly see. These sounds are formed into a
perfect order. Their very soul may hide in the peculiar tone of the
oboe or horn; they change their significance a dozen times in as many
moments; slender filaments of them run through and through as in a
fairy web. The child gapes. “Is this music?” it says; “I thought music
was the black and white keys, or holding my hand right, or scales, or
the key of F or G, or sonatinas, or something.” No one has ever told
her what music really is. She has only her delicate, tender, childlike
feelings as a guide What she has been doing may have been as little
like music as grammar is like literature.

Both the child and the adult must be brought into contact with music;
with rhythmic movement in all its delightful diversity; with great
musical themes and the uses to which they are put by composers; with
musical forms by means of which pieces of music are made coherent;
with harmonies in their primary states, or blended into a thousand
hues. They must learn to listen, so that, as the music unfolds, there
takes place within them an unfolding which is the exact answer to the
processes going on in the music. All this cannot be brought about save
by intention.

It is the purpose of this book, then, to lead the reader by what
capacity he possesses to such an understanding of the art of music as
shall make every part of it intelligible to him. And since some readers
may have little knowledge of music, this book also attempts to set
forth the common grounds upon which all art rests, and to tempt those
who are interested in the other arts to become inquisitive about music.
Curiosity is a necessary element in human intelligence.




MUSIC AND LIFE




CHAPTER I

WHAT IS MUSIC?


I. DISTINCTION BETWEEN MUSIC AND THE OTHER ARTS

Any discussion of the art of music,--of its significance in relation
to ourselves, of its æsthetic qualities, or of methods of teaching
it,--to be comprehensive, must be based on a clear recognition of the
one important quality which is inherent in it, which distinguishes it
from the other arts and which gives it its peculiar power. Painting
and sculpture are definitive. It is not possible to create a great
work in either of these mediums without a subject taken from life;
for, however imaginative the work may be, it must depict something. In
painting, for example, the very soul of a religious belief may shine
from the canvas,--as in the Sistine Madonna,--but that belief cannot
be there presented without physical embodiment. And when the physical
embodiment is reduced to its simplest terms, as in some of Manet’s
paintings, there is still the necessity of portrayal; Manet’s wonderful
light and opalescent color must fall on an object. Turner paints a
mystical landscape, a mythological vale, such as haunts the dreams
of poets, but it is impossible for him to produce the illusion _by
itself_; the vale is a vale, human beings are there. Sculpture, which
makes its effects by the perfection of its rhythms around an axis, and
by its shadows,--effects of the most subtle and, at the same time,
of the most elemental kind,--it, too, must portray; the emotion must
take form and substance, and that form must be drawn from the outward,
visible world.

In poetry the same limitations exist. It, too, must deal in human life
with a certain definiteness. But the greatest poetry is continually
struggling to slough off the garment of reality and free the soul from
its trammels. It trembles on the verge of music, seeking to find words
for what cannot be said, and attaining a great part of its meaning by a
sublime euphony. The didactic is its grave.

Before I attempt to describe the peculiar quality which distinguishes
music, it will be well to state quite clearly what it cannot do. This
can best be understood by a comparison between it and poetry, which
of all the arts is nearest to music, because it exists in the element
of time, whereas painting and sculpture exist in space. Poetry is
made up of words arranged in meaning and euphony. Each of these words
signifies an object, idea, or feeling; the word “chair,” for example,
has come to mean an object to sit upon. Now, while notes in music are
given certain alphabetical names indicating a pitch determined by sound
waves, the use of these letters is arbitrary and has no connection with
their original hieroglyphic and hieratic significance. The musical
sound we call _a_, for example, means nothing as a sound, has no common
or agreed-upon or archæological significance. Combine the note _a_
with _c_ and _e_ in what is known as the common chord and you still
have no meaning; combine _a_ with other notes and form a melody from
them, and you have perhaps beauty and coherence of form,--a pleasing
sequence of sounds,--but still no meaning such as you get from the
combination of letters in a word like “chair.” Combine _a_ with a great
many other notes into a symphony, and this coherence and beauty may
become quite wonderful in effect, but it still remains untranslatable
into other terms, and without such definite significance as is attained
by combining words in poems. So we say that notes have no significance
in themselves; that musical phrases have no meaning as have phrases in
language; that melodies are not sentences, and symphonies not poems.

If we compare music with painting or sculpture we find much the same
contrast. Just as music does not mean anything in the sense that words
do, so it has no “subject” in the sense that Turner’s The Fighting
Téméraire has, or Donatello’s David. It does not deal with objects. It
cannot portray a ship or a star. It may seem to float, it may flash
for a moment, but it does not describe or set forth. Furthermore, it
cannot, strictly speaking, give expression to ideas. It may be so
serious, so ordered, so equable--as in Bach--that we say its composer
was a philosopher, but no item of his philosophy appears. Above all
it is unmoral,[1] and without belief or dogma. Too much stress can
hardly be laid on this negative quality in music, for it is in this
very disability that its greatest virtue lies. I shall refer later to
the frequent tendency among listeners to avoid facing this problem by
attaching meanings of their own to the music they hear. I need only
note in passing that these so-called “meanings” seldom agree, and that
the habit is the result either of ignorance of the true office of
music, or of mental lassitude toward it. “It is not enough to enjoy
yourself over a work of art,” says Joubert; “you must enjoy it.”

Now the one distinguishing quality of music is this: it finds its
perfection in itself without relation to other objects. It is what it
is in itself alone. It is non-definitive; it does not use symbols of
something else; it cannot be translated into other terms. The poet
seeks always a complete union of the thing said and the method of
saying it. Flaubert seeks patiently and persistently for the one word
which shall not only be the exact symbol of his thought, but which
shall fit his euphony. The painter so draws his objects, so distributes
his colors, and so arranges his composition as to make of them plastic
mediums for the expression of his thought, and the greatness of his
picture depends first of all and inevitably on his power of fusing his
subjects with his technique. In sculpture precisely the same process
takes place. Neither of these arts actually copies nature; each
“arranges” it for its own purpose.

In music this much-sought union of matter and manner is complete; the
thing said and the method of saying it are one and indivisible. It is,
as Pater says, “the ideal of all art whatever, precisely because in
music it is impossible to distinguish the form from the substance or
matter, the subject from the expression.”


II. THE ELEMENTS OF MUSIC

The primal element in music is vibration. Sound-waves in some ordered
sequence--silent till they strike our ears--are formed by our ingenuity
and sense of order into patterns of beauty. They exist in time, not in
space. They are motion. And these vibrations are the very substance of
all life; of stars in their courses, of the pulse-beats of the heart,
of the mysterious communications from the nerves to the brain, of
light, of heat, of color. The plastic arts are static. Painting has the
power


                               “to give
     To one blest moment snatched from fleeting time
     The appropriate calm of blest eternity.”


Sculpture is motion caught in a moment of perfection. Music is motion
always in perfection. This rhythm exists also in literature and the
other arts. Poe would be nothing without it; Whitman uses it in long
swelling undulations which are sometimes almost indistinguishable; the
composition in a great painting is a rhythm; the Apollo Belvedere is
all rhythm. But in music rhythm is a physical, moving property; rhythm
in being, not rhythm caught in a poise. The possibilities of rhythmic
play in music far exceed those in poetry, for in the latter the sense
or meaning would be clouded by too much rhythmic complication. It
would be impossible to do in poetry, for example, what Beethoven does
at the beginning of a movement in one of his string quartettes,[2]
where the ’cello, entirely alone, repeats one note fifteen times in
two rhythmic groups; there is no melody and no harmony--merely one
reiterated rhythmic sound. It is also impossible for poetry to present
three or four different rhythms simultaneously, as music often does;
nor can poetic rhythms carry across a complete rhythmic disruption
whose whole æsthetic sense lies in its relations to a permanent rhythm
which it momentarily violates, as is the case in the first movement of
Beethoven’s Third Symphony. In short, rhythm in music has a diversity,
a flexibility, and a physical vigor quite unparalleled in any other art.

Melody in music consists in a sequence of single sounds curved to some
line of beauty. Whereas rhythm is conceivable without any intellectual
quality,--as a purely physical manifestation,--melody implies some
sense of design, since it progresses from one point in time to another,
and without design would be merely a series of incoherent sounds. In
this design rhythm plays a leading part, and the themes having the
most perfect balance of rhythms are the most interesting. Examples
of diverse but highly coördinated melodies may be found in the slow
movement of Beethoven’s pianoforte sonata, Opus 13, and in Brahms’s
pianoforte quartette, Opus 60, the synthetic quality of which is like
that of a finely constructed sentence. Melody, being design, gives
conscious evidence of the personality of its creator. Schubert, for
example, is like Keats and represents the type of pure lyric utterance.
Bach, on the contrary, is essentially a thinker, and his melodies are
full of vigorous and diversified rhythms.

Folk-song was the beginning of what we call “melody,” and the best
specimens of folk-songs are quite as perfect within their small range
as are the greatest works of the masters. Their contour and rhythm are
sometimes as delicately balanced as the mechanism of a fine instrument.
And when we remember that these melodies were the spontaneous utterance
of simple, untutored peoples who, in forming them, depended almost
entirely on instinct, we realize how intimate a medium music is for
the expression of feeling. People who could neither read nor write and
who had little knowledge or experience of artistic objects could,
nevertheless, create perfect works of beauty in the medium of sound.

Harmony is an adjunct to the other two elements. It is in music
something of what color is in painting. As contrasted with the long
line of melody and the regular impulses in time of rhythm, harmony
deals in masses. Melody carries the mind from one point to another;
harmony strikes simultaneously and produces an immediate sensation.
Its effect upon us is probably due to a subtle physical correspondence
within ourselves to combinations of sounds that spring direct from
nature. The whole history of music shows a gradual assimilation by
human beings of new combinations of sounds, and it is probable that
only the first chapters of that history have been written.

We have spoken of the synthetic quality of melody, and it is obvious
that the larger the scope of music the more important this quality
becomes. When a composer creates a sonata or symphony he must so
dispose all his material--rhythms, melodies, and harmonies--as to give
to the work perfect coherence. A work of art expressed in the element
of time needs this synthesis more than one expressed in space. For
although there is in music no “subject,” yet beauty is being unfolded
and the need of a cumulative and coördinated expression of it is quite
as great as it would be were the music “about” something. There are
various ways of arranging musical material so as to attain this end.
The chief principle of its synthesis is derived from the volatile
nature of sound itself. It is this: that no one series of sounds formed
into a melody can long survive the substitution of other series,
unless there be given some restatement, or at least some reminder,
of the first. The result of this is that in the early music there
was an alternation of one phrase or one tune with another; and this
in turn was followed by all sorts of experiments tending to bring
about variety in unity. (These simple forms somewhat resemble what
is known in poetry as the triolet.) The most common form in music is
threefold. It is found in folk-songs, marches, minuets, nocturnes, and
so forth, and--expanded to huge proportions--in symphonic movements.
In folk-songs this form consists in repeating a first phrase after a
second contrasting one. In minuets, nocturnes, romances, and the like,
each part is a complete melody in itself. In a symphonic movement the
first part--save in such notable exceptions as the first movement of
the “Eroica” of Beethoven--contains all the thematic material, the
second contains what is called the “development” of the material stated
in the first, and the third part restates the first with such changes
as shall give it new significance.

It is in this synthetic quality that much of the greatness of symphonic
music lies. No other quality, however fine in itself, can take its
place. Schumann, for example, created interesting and beautiful
themes in profusion, but his compositions in the larger forms lack a
complete synthesis. Bach was the greatest master in this respect. So
perfect is the ordering of his material that it gives that impression
of inevitability which distinguishes all great art everywhere. It is
obvious enough that parallels to this form will be found in literature,
for it is a part of life and nature. It is youth, manhood, and old age;
it is sunrise, noon, and sunset; it is spring, summer, and winter.
So it must be; for art is only life in terms of beauty, and human
life is only nature expressing itself in terms of man and woman. This
then is the thing we call music: rhythm, melody, and harmony arranged
into forms of beauty, existing in time. It is without meaning, it is
without “subject,” it is without idea. It creates a world of its own,
fictitious, fabulous, and irrelevant--a world of sound, evanescent yet
indestructible.


III. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF MUSIC

Music deals first of all with feeling or emotion. But since emotion
may be guided by the mind and transfused by the imagination,--since
emotion is not a separate and isolated part of our being,--so music
may be so ordered by the mind and so transfused by the imagination as
to become intellectual and imaginative. It is true that the greater
part of the music produced and performed deals only with emotion, but
this is equally true of literature. The popular novel is nine tenths
emotion, one tenth mind, and the rest imagination. So it is with music,
though such illogical invention as one constantly finds in many popular
novels would be intolerable in any music. Since there seems to be an
incongruity between the statement that music has no definite meaning
and the statement that it is intellectual, let us take a specific
illustration and see if we cannot reconcile the apparent confliction.

We must first of all distinguish between the quality itself and the
expression of the quality. A person may have a mind stored with wisdom
and be completely what we call “intellectual,” without ever expressing
himself by a spoken or written word. His wisdom exists by itself and
for itself, entirely separated from its expression. If he expresses
himself, and with skill, we call that expression literature, but, in
any case, it remains wisdom. And what is wisdom? It is what Mr. Eliot
describes a liberal education to be--“a state of mind”; it is the
fusion of knowledge with experience, with feeling, and with imagination.

Now words are symbols which diminish in their efficacy as they try
to compass feeling and imagination. If the wise man is cold, he can
say, “I am cold”; but if he wishes to tell you of his idea of God,
he has no words adequate for the purpose, because he is dealing with
something which is not in the domain of knowledge alone--which he can
feel, or perhaps imagine, but cannot define. The reason alone never
even touches the far-away circle of that perfection which we believe
to exist, and the subtle inner relations between man and the visible
and invisible world refuse to be harnessed to language. For these he
finds expression in some form of beauty. “The beautiful,” says Goethe,
“is a manifestation of the secret laws of nature which, but for this
appearance, had been forever concealed from us.”

So we say that in wisdom the qualities we call insight, feeling,
and imagination must find for themselves some more plastic medium
of expression than language. And when that plastic medium, though
non-definitive, has those qualities of coherence, continuity, and
form which are essential to all intellectual expression, we are
justified in calling it “intellectual.” Let us take for our specific
illustration the first movement of the Ninth Symphony of Beethoven.
It is impossible to imagine this as an expression of feeling only,
untouched by thought or by imagination. The inevitable conclusion
arrived at by any person who understands it is that the feeling is
absolutely controlled by the mind, and that it is imagination that
gives it its extraordinary effect. Compare it with the first movement
of Tschaikovsky’s “Pathétique Symphony” where emotion runs riot; the
difference is as great as that between “Victory” and “The Deemster.”
Compare it with a symphony by Mendelssohn, and the contrast is as
vivid as that between a novel by Meredith and one by Miss Braddon.
Beethoven’s music contains, in the first place, themes whose import all
completely receptive persons feel to be profound. (That these themes do
not so impress others is due either to atrophy of the musical faculty,
to mental lassitude, or to lack of experience of great music.) These
themes are presented in such design as not only to make the whole
movement entirely coherent, but to give it a sense of rushing onward to
an inevitable conclusion. So intensive is their treatment that almost
the whole five hundred or more measures grow out of the original theme
or thesis, some fifteen measures long. So imaginative is it that it
seems to gather to itself all related things in heaven and earth and
fuse them into one. In short, we must say that this music emanates
from the mind of a great man, who has subjected emotion to the control
of the will and who has exercised that highest function of the mind
that we call imagination.

May we not say, then, that this is wisdom? Shall we deny it because
it cannot be spelled out word by word? Shall we not rather say that
music is a means of expressing the deepest wisdom, that which defies
categorical expression? May we not accept Schopenhauer’s saying: “Music
is an image of the will”? Are we not justified in stating that music
is even an expression of the deepest relation with the visible and
invisible world which the soul of man is capable of experiencing, and
that these relations, inexpressible in more concrete manifestations,
are expressible in music? The pathos and resignation and courage in the
first movement of the Ninth Symphony of Beethoven are not his or yours
or mine; they are the qualities themselves in their infinite being,
more true, more noble, more pure than his or yours or mine. May we not,
then, even go so far as to say that music tells us the deepest truths
of human life; that “it comes,” as Symonds says, “speaking the highest
wisdom in a language our reason does not understand because it is older
and deeper and closer than reason?”


IV. “BEAUTY IS TRUTH, TRUTH BEAUTY”

I have already stated that the other arts have for their ideal that
fusing of subject and expression which in music is complete, and
I have further stated that the purpose or object of music is to
present emotion ordered and guided by the mind and illumined by the
imagination. In this latter respect all the arts are alike. It is in
the very nature of their being that they seek to find the heart of
the great secret. The purpose of painting and sculpture is not to
present objects as objects, but to set them forth in such harmonious
perfection of line and color and rhythm as will reveal their deepest
significance. The greatest examples of the plastic arts cannot be
understood through sense-perception of objects. Rembrandt is a greater
painter than Bougereau, not only because he has superior technique, but
because he has deeper insight. This is why the “subject” in painting is
comparatively unimportant.

It is the same with literature. In “Jane Eyre” the “subject” is more
tangible and vivid than in “Villette,” but the latter is the finer
book, because the technical skill is greater, the insight deeper.
“There are no good subjects or bad subjects,” says Hugo; “there are
only good poets and bad poets.” Any subject is interesting when a
master-mind presents it in full significance. A custom-house is
a prosaic thing, and a custom-house that has neither exports nor
imports, but only a few sleepy old pensioners dozing in the sun, might
be thought a dull subject for a writer; but Hawthorne’s imagination
and subtlety of literary expression clothe it with both beauty and
significance. Even the noblest and most tragic deeds find their best
justification in a sublime harmony of beauty. The Greeks knew this
well. Euripides, in “The Trojan Women,” puts on the lips of Hecuba
these words:--


     “Had He not turned us in his hand, and thrust
     Our high things low and shook our hills as dust,
     We had not been this splendor, and our wrong
     An everlasting music for the song
     Of earth and heaven!”[3]


Deeds, monuments, cities, and civilizations fade into nothingness, but
a few words, or a strain of music turned by an artist, will live on
forever. The battle of Gettysburg will become merely a paragraph of
history, the causes for which it was fought will be as nothing, but the
words spoken by Lincoln will be preserved for all time, not because
they were wise, but because they were wise and beautiful.

There is no escape from this condition. An occasional great writer
has railed at beauty, only to prove finally that his own permanence
depended on it. Carlyle, for example, was more caustic than usual when
he discussed poetry. His comment on Browning’s “The Ring and the Book”
ran thus: “A wonderful book, one of the most wonderful ever written.
I re-read it all through--all made out of an ‘Old Bailey’ story that
might have been told in ten lines, and only wants forgetting.” Yet the
best part of “Sartor Resartus” is its beauty, and there are in “The
French Revolution” many passages of quite perfect poetic imagery and
characterization without which it would lose much of its value. What
we call “Carlyle” is no longer a man; nor is it a philosophy, or a
history; it is nothing but a _style_, a manner of saying things--an
individual, characteristic, and strange blend of hard and soft, of
high and low, of rugged and tender, all struggling with a Puritanical
conscience. So we say that beauty is the lodestone by which all life is
tested.

No game can be perfectly played unless the physical motions are timed
in beauty; no machine will act save in perfect synthesis; no character
is strong until it attains a harmony within itself. Beauty is the
matrix in which life shall be finally moulded.

All forms of artistic expression, then, require that we shall see
the object not as fact but as art. If it is fact--that is, merely an
isolated object or event--it remains insignificant until some artist
catches it up into the wider realm in which it belongs and sets it
forth in some form of beauty. If we accept this conception of all the
arts as seeking the inner sense of things, as portraying life in its
essence rather than in its outward manifestations, we shall be able to
understand the peculiar power of music. It becomes then, not merely
a series of sounds arranged so as to be euphonious and pleasing to
the ear, but a book of life which contains the ultimate expression of
our instinct and of our wisdom. The Third Symphony of Beethoven, for
example, gives us a more convincing presentment of heroic struggle
than is to be found in the other arts or in literature, first, because
it has the power to present it in the element of time, which is an
essential part of any heroic deed; second, because it presents it as a
quality disassociated from a particular heroism and therefore elevated
into a type and made eternal; and third, because it presents it in
conjunction with those other qualities without which there can be no
heroism at all. (For no quality in life or element in nature exists
for us save as the opposite or reverse of something else. What we call
light is comprehensible only as the opposite of darkness; love is the
opposite of hate, cold of heat, and so forth.)

Each of the other arts has one or two of these qualities; none has all
of them. The novelist, for example, can use the first and last but
not the second. Meredith’s “Vittoria” is an ideal presentment of the
struggle for Italian unity, but the heroism which constitutes the
essence of the book has to find expression through actual persons.
So the greatest virtue of music lies not alone in its peculiar
unification of matter and manner, its artistic perfection, but in the
power which that gives it to create a world not based on the outward
and the visible, but on that invisible realm of thought, feeling, and
aspiration which is our real world. For if there is any one certain
historical fact, it is that from the earliest times until now man
has continually sought some escape from reality, some building up
of a perfect world of ideal beauty which should still his eternal
dissatisfaction with the imperfections and inconsistencies of his own
life. It is in the very nature of his situation that he should seek
some perfection somewhere. So he has tried to paint this perfection on
canvas, idealizing life and nature into a satisfying form of beauty;
or he has carved a physical perfection in marble to deify himself and
give himself a place in nature; or he has built up for himself a world
of magical words in which all his noblest dreams strive for expression.
Everywhere and always he has had this dream, which has saved him when
all else failed. And the noblest of his dreamers have been those whose
imaginations have transcended the limitations of the actual and brought
it into relation with the unknown.

Music, obeying the great laws that underlie all life and to which
all the arts are subject, having for its means of expression the
most plastic of all media, depending on intuitive perception of
truth, not compelled to perpetuate objects, dealing with that larger
part of man’s being which lies hidden beneath both his acts and his
thoughts,--that which Carlyle calls “the deep fathomless domain of
the Unconscious,”--music is the one perfect medium for this dream of
humanity. In its expression of human emotions it enjoys the inestimable
advantage of entire irrelevance. It does not have to develop a
character or person, but only an attribute or quality. The “Eroica”
symphony, for example, has all the force of a mythological epic in
which the heroes are pure spirit-types of humanity, of no age or
time--gods, if you will, and above human limitations.

This is the quality of music that makes it precious to us. It builds
for us an _immaterial_ world--not made of objects, or theories, or
dogmas, or philosophies, but of pure spirit--a means of escape from the
thralldom of every day.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] It may, of course, be used with molds of definite meaning; but we
are speaking of pure music.

[2] The Scherzo of Opus 59, no. 1.

[3] Gilbert Murray translation.




CHAPTER II

MUSIC FOR CHILDREN


I. TRAINING THE SENSE FOR BEAUTY

In what I have to say about music for children I am not unmindful
of the diversity of American life, and of the prevalent idea that
Americans do not pay much attention to music (or to any other form of
beauty) because they live in a new country in which the greater part of
their energy is devoted to subduing nature and carving their fortunes.
As a nation we are said to be too diverse to have evolved any definite
æsthetic practice, and we suppose ourselves too busy with the practical
things in life to pay much attention to it.

While it is doubtless true that there are numberless prosperous
American families in which the words “art” and “literature” mean
nothing whatever, this condition is due, in most cases, not to lack of
time, but to lack of inclination. We, like other people, do what we
like to do. No real attention is paid in childhood to the cultivation
of a love of the beautiful; very little attention is paid to it in the
educational institutions where we are trained; so we grow up and enter
upon life with a desultory liking for music, with a distinct lack of
appreciation for poetry, and with almost no interest in painting or
sculpture.

And this condition is likely to increase rather than diminish as time
goes on, until, having finally arrived at moments of leisure and
finding that neither our money nor any other material possession gives
us any deep or permanent satisfaction, we turn to beauty only to be
confronted with the old warning: “Too late, ye cannot enter now.” For
we have arrived at the time when, in Meredith’s phrase, “Nature stops,
and says to us, ‘Thou art now what thou wilt be.’” For this capacity
for understanding and loving great books and paintings and music has to
grow with our own growth and cannot be postponed to another season. The
average American man is supposed to have no time for these things. He
has time, but he refuses to turn it into leisure,--leisure which means
contemplation and thoughtfulness,--though he very likely knows that
this has been accomplished over and over again by men who have saved
out of a busy life for that purpose a little time every day.

One recalls Darwin’s pathetic statement wherein he describes his
early love for poetry and music, and the final complete loss of
those “capabilities” through neglect. “The loss of these tastes,” he
says, “is a loss of happiness, and may possibly be injurious to the
intellect, and more probably to the moral character by enfeebling the
emotional part of our nature.”

The intellect of man, in itself, is never supreme or sufficient.
Feeling or instinct is half of knowledge. “Whoever walks a furlong
without sympathy,” says Whitman, “walks to his own funeral drest in
his shroud.” Of any man, American or otherwise, who lives his life
unmindful of all beauty we may justly say, as Carlyle said of Diderot,
“He dwelt all his days in a thin rind of the Conscious; the deep
fathomless domain of the Unconscious whereon the other rests and has
its meaning was not under any shape surmised by him.”

Must not the education of children in beauty begin, then, with their
parents? Must they not be aroused, at least, to an _intellectual_
conviction of its value, even though they have missed its joy?
Can the matter be safely left to the jurisdiction of the schools
themselves whose curricula are already overcrowded with methods of
escape from this very thing? Does not the school answer the general
conception of education obtaining among the fathers and mothers of the
school-children? Can it be expected--is it possible for it--to rise
far above that conception? My object is therefore to suggest, first,
that the perception of beauty is, in the highest sense, education;
second, that music is especially so, because it is the purest form of
beauty; and, third, that music is the only form of beauty by means of
which very young children can be educated, because it is the only form
accessible to them.

Need I point out that there has never been a time in the history of
mankind when human beings have not paid tribute to beauty? In their
attempt to escape what may be called the traffic of life and to rise
above its sordid limitations, have they not always and everywhere
created for themselves some sort of detached ideal by means of which
they justified themselves in an otherwise unintelligible world? This
ideal may have been a god of stone, but it figured for them a perfect
absolution. Surrounded by brutal forces about which they knew nothing,
subject to pestilence, to war, to starvation, to the fury of the
elements, unable safely to shelter their bodies, they built for their
souls a safe elysium. This ideal was always one of order and beauty;
every civilization has possessed it, and it was to each civilization
not only religion, but also what we call “art.”

I referred in the first chapter to that quality in art which consists
in its “holding a mirror up to nature,” and thus focusing our
attention. Browning expresses this in “Fra Lippo Lippi,” where he
says,--


     “For, don’t you mark, we’re made so that we love
     First when we see them painted, things we have passed
     Perhaps a hundred times nor cared to see.”


But the highest office of art is not so much to attract our attention
to beautiful objects as to make us realize through the artist’s skill
what the objects signify. It is the artist who so depicts life as
to make it intelligible to us; it is he who sees all those deeper
relations which underlie all things; he, and he only, can so present
human aspirations and human actions as to lift them out of the maze
and give them order and sequence. Through all the welter of political
theories, of philosophies, of dogmas insisted on at the point of
excommunication; amid the discoveries of science and the tendency to
make life into a mechanically operated thing, the still small voice of
the poet rises always supreme--supreme in wisdom, supreme in insight,
the seer, the prophet, the philosopher; when all else has passed he
remains, for beauty is the only permanence. To eliminate beauty from
education is to destroy its very soul.

From the law of gravity to Shelley’s “To a Skylark,” beauty is
the central element. In physics, in mathematics, in astronomy, in
chemistry, there is the same perfection of order and sequence, the same
correlation of forces, the same attraction of matter which, operating
in the fine arts, brings about what we call “painting,” “sculpture,”
“poetry,” and “music.” The whole of nature is a postulate of this
doctrine, and there is no subject taught from kindergarten to college
which may not be taught as in accord with it. There is a rhythm of
beauty in all things animate and inanimate--an endless variety around
a central unity. The individuality in nature and in human life is as
a rhythmic diversity to a divine and central unity. The leaves of a
maple tree are all alike and all different; the difference between
the mechanical arts and the fine arts is a difference of rhythmic
flexibility: one is fixed in rhythm in accordance with physical laws,
and acts in perfect sequence and regularity; the other is a free
individualized rhythmic play around a fixed center. The painter may
not dispose the objects on his canvas as he pleases--nature allows him
only a certain freedom; the sculptor may distribute his weights and
his rhythms around the axis with only so much freedom from the demands
of nature as his particular purpose justifies; even the strain of
music, which seems to wander so much at will that it is often called a
“rhapsody,”--it, too, is merely a play of rhythms and contours around
a fixed center, and conforms to a common purpose just as a maple leaf
does. A machine acts in mechanical synthesis, a melody acts in æsthetic
synthesis; neither is free. So we say there is no such thing as an
isolated fact, or subject, or idea.

Thus everything taught to children can be taught as beauty, and if it
is not so taught, its very essence must dissolve and disappear. “The
mean distance from the earth to the moon is about two hundred and forty
thousand miles”; “two and two make four”; “an island is a body of land
entirely surrounded by water”;--so a child learns his lesson in what
are called facts (the most deceptive and soulless things in the world).
To him “the moon” and “a mile” are little more than words; 2 + 2 are
troublesome hieroglyphics; “an island” is, perhaps, merely a word in a
physical geography book; but to you all these objects and quantities
are, perhaps, beautiful; for you


                    “The moon doth with delight
     Look around her when the heavens are bare”;


for you numbers have come to have that significance which makes them
beautiful; an island may have touched your imagination as it has
Conrad’s, who calls it “a great ship anchored in the open sea”; you
have seen that beauty which lies behind facts when they fall, as with
a click, into the mechanism of things. So must children be taught to
realize at the very beginning something of that great unity which
pervades the world of thought and of matter. Some comprehension
must be given to them of that marvelous sense of fitting together,
of perfect correspondence, which all nature reveals and which is
ultimately beauty. It is this quality, residing in every subject, which
constitutes the justification for our insistence on beauty as a part of
education.

With our present systems of education all ideality is crushed, for
this ideality is a personal quality, whereas all we are, we are in
mass. “You are trying to make that boy into another you,” said Emerson,
some fifty years ago; “one’s enough.” Modern education, subject to
constant whims, has become a capacious maw into which our children are
thrown. Everything for use, nothing for beauty; for use means money,
while beauty--what is beauty good for?--(a question which Lowell, in
one of his essays, says “would be death to the rose and be answered
triumphantly by the cabbage”). This is indeed an old thesis, but never
has it more needed stating than now. It applies everywhere. Literature
taught as beauty is uplifting and joyful; taught as syntax it is dead
and cheerless. All other forms of instruction lose their force if
they are detached from that poetic harmony of which they are a part.
Numbers, cities, machines, symphonies, the objects on your table, you
yourself,--all these are to be seen as belonging to this harmony,
without which the world is Bedlam.

American children are musical, American adults are not, and the chief
reason lies in the wasted opportunities of childhood. If the natural
taste of our children for music were properly developed, they would
continue to practice it and to find pleasure in doing so, and thus
would avoid the fatal error of _postponing their heaven to another
time_--the great mistake of life and of theology.

I desire therefore to deal here with the possibilities which music
offers to children, not to a few children in playing the pianoforte,
but to all children in love and understanding. It is obviously
desirable to make them all love music, and, since few of them ever
attain satisfactory proficiency in playing instruments, our chief
problem lies in trying to develop their taste and thereby keeping their
allegiance.


II. THE VALUE OF SINGING

In the first chapter I discussed the qualities and properties of music
as such--music, that is, in its pure estate, unconnected with words as
in songs, or with words, action, costume, and scenery, as in opera.
And now, in writing about children’s music, it is still necessary to
keep in mind that, even when music is allied to words, it has the
necessities of its own nature to fulfill, and that the use of suitable
or even fine words in a child’s song does not change this condition.

In beginning this discussion I propose to ignore for the moment the
effect in after life of what we advocate for children, and I also
discard (with a certain contempt) the common notion--true enough in its
way--that music is for them a rest and a change after burdensome tasks.
For we must see music, in relation to children, as it really is. I go
behind the psychologist[4] who says, “ ... the prime end of musical
education ... is to train the sentiments, to make children feel nature,
religion, country, home, duty, ... to guarantee sanity of the heart out
of which are the issues of life”; for I say that music, by itself,
cannot make children feel nature, religion, country, home, or duty, and
that these sentiments are aroused by the heightened effect of words
set to music, and not by the music itself. The prime end of music--and
of the other arts--is beauty. Song is not story, melodies have nothing
to do with morals, and all the theories about music--such as those of
Darwin and Spencer--are wrong when they attribute to it any ulterior
purpose or origin whatever. Music is an end, not a means.

Now this beauty which the soul of man craves, and always has craved,
cannot be brought to little children in literary form, because they
cannot read or because their knowledge of words is too limited; nor can
it be brought to them in the form of painting, because they are not
sufficiently sensitive to color-vibrations; nor of sculpture, for their
sense of form is not sufficiently developed. In fact, their power of
response is exceedingly limited in most directions. They can neither
draw nor paint nor write nor read, so that this beauty which we value
so highly seems shut out from them. This were so but for music.

By singing, and by singing only, a little child of five may come in
contact with a pure and perfect form of beauty. Not only that, but
the child can reproduce this beauty entirely unaided, and in the
process of doing so its whole being--body, mind, heart, and soul--is
engaged. The song, for the moment, is the child. There is no possible
realization of the little personality comparable to this. Here, in
sounds, is that correlation of impulses in which the stars move; here
is the world of order and beauty in miniature; here is a microcosm
of life; here is a talisman against the cold, unmeaning facts which
are driven into children’s brains to jostle one another in unfriendly
companionship. Through this they can feel a beauty and order which
their minds are incapable of grasping. The joy which a child gets in
reproducing beautiful melodies is like no other experience in life. It
is absolutely a personal act, for the music lends itself to the child’s
individuality as nothing else does. Music, in this sense, preserves in
children that ideality which is one of the most precious possessions
of childhood, and which we would fain keep in after life; which loves
flowers and animals, which sees the truth in fairy stories, which
believes everything to be good and is alien to everything sinister,
which sees the moon and stars, not as objects so many millions of miles
from the earth, and parts of a great solar system, but as lanterns hung
in the heavens.

The prime object, then, of musical education for children is so to
develop their musical sensibilities as to make them love and understand
the best music. Does this bring up the question, “What is the best
music?” By the “best” music I mean exactly what I should mean if I
were to substitute the word “literature” for “music”--I mean the
compositions of the great masters. And if you say that the great
masters did not write music suitable for little children, I reply
that such music has nevertheless been produced by all races _in their
childhood_, that it exists in profusion, that it is commonly known as
“folk-song,” that it is the basis upon which much of the greatest music
in the world rests, and, finally, that it is the natural and, indeed,
the inevitable means of approach to such great music.

This basis, to which I refer, is both actual and ideal. Many great
composers have used actual folk-melodies. The chorales in Bach’s “St.
Matthew Passion,” for example, are based on traditional melodies.
In Haydn’s instrumental compositions folk-songs are often used
_verbatim_, and the total number of them to be found in his works is
very great. Notable examples may be found in Beethoven--as in the
“Rasoumoffsky” quartettes, and the Seventh Symphony--while Schubert,
Brahms, and Tschaikovsky used folk-melodies freely. Dvořák and Grieg
are essentially national in their idiom and style, and folk-music may
be said to be the basis of the music of each. Ideally the debt of music
to folk-song is greater still. Any typical, _Adagio_ of Beethoven (such
as that in the so-called “Pathétique Sonata”) springs from folk-song,
and, in spite of the long process of development through which music
had passed, reflects--in a more mature form--the same sentiment one
finds in the original. How could it be otherwise? Is there any art, or
any other intellectual activity of man, of which the same thing cannot
be said? Were not Keats and Shelley waiting to be born of Coleridge
and Wordsworth? Is there such a thing as a fruit without a vine; a
blossom without a stem; an end without a beginning? There have been
composers, poets, and painters who have lived detached from the common
consciousness--like those strange organisms in nature that float in
sea or air and draw nothing from the earth’s native soil; but all
the greatest minds have been rooted in the past and have drawn their
inspiration from common human experience. Keeping in mind, then, that
our object is to train the taste of children so that they will love
the best music, let us examine what is actually taking place in the
teaching of music to children.


III. CURRENT METHODS OF TEACHING

The most common fallacy in our teaching consists in putting knowledge
before experience, or theory before practice. Children are taught
_about_ music before they have had sufficient experience of it. They
are taught, for example, to pin pasteboard notes on a make-belief
staff; they are told that one note is the father-note and another the
mother-note (one supposes the chromatics to be irascible old-maid
aunts); all sorts of subterfuges are resorted to in an attempt to teach
them what they are too young to learn and what, in any case, can have
no significance whatever except when based on a long process of actual
experience. One might as well try to satisfy a hungry child with a
picture of an apple as to show a child notes before it has dealt with
sounds.

This, then, is our great fallacy. It is impossible to expect children
to be musical if they begin with symbols of any kind. Furthermore, in
the teaching of songs without notation, the whole stress can be laid on
fundamental things. What are these? First, a sense of rhythm. In the
development of music rhythm came before melody, as melody came before
harmony. Rhythmic freedom and accuracy are essential, not only to a
child’s musical education, but to his physical well-being. Now there
is one thing certain,--namely, that freedom and accuracy in rhythm can
be brought about only by actual bodily movement. (It is unnecessary
to dwell on the fundamental difference between actual rhythmic
movement and any symbol of it, such as a half or quarter note.) And
the beginning of the musical training of children should consist in
marching, or clapping hands to music played by the teacher. Following
this the _actual notes_ of simple folk-song may be expressed in bodily
motion--as in running or dancing--the chief point being to engage the
whole body. The beginnings of _Eurhythmics_ as evolved by Dalcroze
serve this purpose excellently, the meter of the song (4/4 or 3/4)
being expressed with the arms, while, at the same time, the rhythms (or
actual notes) are expressed by the movement of the feet with the body
in motion. It must always be kept in mind, however, that this training
is for the mind and the æsthetic sense, and that the bodily motions are
for the purpose of giving children an exact sense of rhythm. Too great
stress cannot be laid on the necessity of always using good music.
Furthermore, I wish to avoid the pitfalls that are spread at every hand
in the form of schools for _self-expression_ in which children and
adults are taught so-called “æsthetic” movements to music. Æsthetic
dancing is one thing; a musical education is another. The cry for
self-expression is characteristic of out attitude toward education. A
child or an adult is asked to listen to a piece of music and then to
express in motion or pose what _it feels_. Undisciplined by experience,
incapable--as we all are--of fathoming the mystery of great music,
uneducated in those immutable laws that underlie all æsthetics,
what can such a person express--save that idiosyncrasy which he at
that moment is? So, ultimately, one expresses a Beethoven sonata or
symphony by poses and movements--in a Greek dress, against a curtained
background and under a calcium light! This delicate, transitory,
elusive, and impenetrable thing we call music is something more than
motion; yes, more even than motion, melody, and harmony together, for
they are but its body; its spirit can neither be fathomed nor expressed
save in terms of itself.

On every side this sort of instruction goes on. One hears glib
statements on the lips of uninstructed persons about child psychology,
“second” brain, and so forth. A pupil is asked to listen to a phrase of
music and then tell the teacher what “comes through.” We must remember
that art is discipline and that there is no real liberty except under
law. We want children to use their minds accurately and to have control
of their bodies, but this use and this control can only come through
definite and regulated effort. Gropings in the dark, detached and
illusive pursuits of the will-o’-the-wisps of education will never
accomplish our purpose.


IV. WHAT SHOULD CHILDREN SING?

But even these artificial and false methods are less harmful to
children than are the poor, vapid, and false songs by means of which
their taste is slowly and surely disintegrated. Now the nature of music
is such that many people are unable to see why one child’s song is
better than another. There is a considerable number of people having
to do with children’s music who seem quite incapable of distinguishing
between a really beautiful folk-song and a trivial copy of one. Long
association with the latter has produced the inevitable result. Only
one argument can be brought to bear on such persons, an argument having
nothing to do with æsthetics--namely, that the current music for
children of one generation is inevitably displaced by that of the next,
whereas the same folk-songs are continually reproduced, and are sung
by increasing generations of children the world over. Any musician can
string together in logical sequence a series of notes to fit a verse
of simple poetry--almost every musician has; any poet can put together
simple and easily understood verses; but the hand of time sweeps them
away to oblivion. Out of the depths of simple hearts, in joy or sorrow
or privation, as a balm to toil and labor, as a cry from a mother’s
heart, in battle, in moments of religious exaltation--wherever and
whenever the depths are stirred, song springs forth. A composer can
express only what is in him; his limitations are as confining as are
those of every other artist. Dickens could no more create a Clara
Middleton than could Tschaikovsky a theme like that at the opening of
the Ninth Symphony; and to suppose that the creation of a child’s song
is a simple matter of putting notes together in a correct and agreeable
sequence, is to misconceive the whole creative process.

It is our cardinal error that we think any tune good enough which
is attractive at first hearing. In the music-books provided for
kindergarten and for home singing there is an endless series of poor,
vapid, over-sweet melodies which children, hungry for any music, will
sing readily enough for lack of better. Some of these tunes smack
unmistakably of a Broadway musical comedy; many of them are full of
mawkish sentiment and affected simplicity. No real progress can be made
until we reach definite conclusions on this point and act on them. Our
taste and that of our children is never stationary,--we continually
advance or go backwards,--and the subtle disintegration of the taste of
children by bad songs results inevitably in indifference to good music
in later life. The road branches here; one leads the way we know too
well, the other leads to a real love of fine music, to a real happiness
in it, and to a real respect for it. Let me say, also, that children
love good songs, and that, as a part of their natural or normal
endowment, they possess in this respect, and to a remarkable degree,
that quality which we ignobly call “taste.” (I recall an old Egyptian
manuscript in the Bodleian Library containing a letter which ran thus:
“Theon to his father, Theon--Greeting. It was a fine thing that you did
not take me to Alexandria with you. Send me a lyre, I implore you! If
you don’t, I won’t eat anything. I won’t drink anything. There!”)

The number of musical nostrums for children is legion, and I have no
desire to enumerate them. Their effects are in inverse relation to
their extensive and--sometimes--expensive paraphernalia. But I will
quote a single sentence from a popular song-book for children as an
illustration of the tendency which they represent: “Understanding as we
do the innate fondness of children for rich harmonies, we have given
special attention to the harmonization of the melodies; and although it
is occasionally necessary for children to sing without accompaniment,
yet such a lack is to be deplored, as the accompaniment often serves as
the rhythmic expression of the thought.”

The foregoing specimen is almost a compendium of what children’s
songs and the teaching of them should not be. If children are fond
of “rich” harmonies, the fact is to be regretted. (I do not believe
that the average child is.) The best possible thing for them, in that
case, would be to hear no harmonies at all for some time, but to sing
entirely unaccompanied (just as you would deprive them of sweetmeats
if they had been made ill by them); special attention given to the
harmonization of children’s songs is given in an entire misconception
of their character and their uses; for the essence of a child’s song
lies in its own rhythmic and melodic independence, and if it depends
on an accompaniment for its rhythm, it is by just so much a poor song.
There is no harm in a simple accompaniment to a folk-song, but in
teaching them to children an accompaniment does for them precisely what
we want them to do for themselves, namely, reproduce correctly the
metre and the rhythm, the pitch and the contour of the melody.

Such training as I have advocated, if carried on through early
childhood, brings with it a natural desire to continue singing and
makes learning to sing from notes much easier than it would otherwise
be. The capacity to sing music at sight is a valuable acquisition
for children, for it enables them to take part in choral singing and
provides them in after years with a delightful means of access to some
of the finest music. The advantage to the individual of this acquired
technique is that it is of the mind and not of the muscles; it does
not desert its possessor as finger technique deserts the player who
ceases to practice. To sing part songs with friends, or to be one of
a larger number singing a composition by Bach or some other great
composer, in which each singer is contributing to reproduce a noble
work of art--this, in itself, is a highly desirable experience. But
the process of learning to sing at sight has sometimes led far away
from true æsthetics and has resulted in a certain debasing of the taste
through singing inferior music. Vocal exercises for sight singing
are necessary, and we can accept them as such, for they do not evoke
the æsthetic sense; but bad songs taught to illustrate some point of
technique are unnecessary and inexcusable.


V. THE FALLACY OF THE INEVITABLE PIANOFORTE LESSON

But the majority of the children who have private instruction in
music take lessons in pianoforte-playing. It has become a custom; the
pianoforte is an article of domestic furniture (and a very ugly one);
pianoforte-playing is a sort of polish to a cursory education. But the
reason is chiefly found in the fact that this is the line of least
resistance: there are plenty of teachers of pianoforte-playing but few
teachers of music, so parents accept that which is available.

There is here a confusion between performing music and understanding
it. Learning to perform seems (and is) a tangible asset--something
definitely accomplished; while merely learning to understand music
seems to parents a vague process likely to have somewhat indefinite
results. They want their children to produce tangible results in
the form of “pieces” well played. Here again we find the same
misconception. Music in this sense is half titillation of the ear,
and half finger-gymnastics. Such music instruction consists in
finding the right key, black or white, holding the hand in a correct
position,--patented and exploited as the only correct method,--putting
the thumb under, and finally, after going through an almost endless
series of evolutions covering many years and carried on at fearful
cost of patience to every one within hearing, in dashing about over
the glittering keys with an abandonment of dexterity positively
bewildering. Nine tenths of the aspirants, however, fall by the
wayside and some time later look back grimly on a long procession of
endless hours almost wasted. One pictures to one’s self a little girl
of seven or eight seated before that ponderous and portentous mass of
iron, steel, wood, wires, and hammers which we call a “pianoforte”
(sixty pounds of tender, delicate humanity trying to express itself
through a solid ton), her legs dangling uncomfortably in space, her
little fingers trying painfully to find the right key, and at the same
time to keep in a correct position, struggling hard the while to relate
together two strange things, a curious black dot on a page and an ivory
key two feet below it, for neither of which she feels much affection.
And then one pictures to one’s self the same child at its mother’s
knee, or with other children, singing with joy and delight a beautiful
song.

I do not advocate the abolishment of pianoforte-teaching to children,
but I do advocate the exercise of some discrimination in regard to it,
and particularly I insist that it should not be begun until the child
has sung beautiful songs for several years and has developed thereby
its musical instincts,--and even then only when a child possesses
a certain amount of that physical coördination which is absolutely
essential to playing the pianoforte. For pianoforte-playing is by no
means a sure method of developing the musical instinct in children.
In the first place it lacks the intimacy of singing, and in the
second place the playing itself demands the greater part of a child’s
attention, so that often it hardly hears the music at all. Any method
of teaching music is, of course, wrong which attempts to substitute
technical dexterity for music itself.

The foregoing is not typical of the most intelligent instruction in
pianoforte-playing, for there are many teachers who reason these
matters out, and there are some parents who see them clearly enough
to allow such teachers a reasonable latitude. But it is true of
pianoforte-teaching in general, as doubtless almost every one of
our readers has had some evidence. It is obvious that even a slight
capacity to play the pianoforte is useful and delightful provided one
plays with taste and understanding, for one gets from it a certain
satisfaction which mere listening does not give. I deplore only an
insistence upon playing as the only means of approach to music; I
question the wisdom of forcing children to play who are not qualified
to do so; and I think playing should, in any case, be postponed until
the musical faculties are awakened by singing.

It is doubtless the conventional and domestic character of the
pianoforte that leads us to train our children to play upon it rather
than upon the violin. The pianoforte is available for casual music,
for accompaniments to songs, for dance music, and so forth. The violin
is, perhaps, only useful to one person. But how much more intimate it
is! Tucked under the chin it becomes almost a part of the player--as
the sculls used to be to the Autocrat when he went rowing. The tones
of the violin are _yours_ and have to be evoked through your own
patient effort; the pianoforte stands glistening and repellent, almost
impervious to your personality. I would have children taught to play
the violin, or violoncello in preference to the pianoforte, and I look
forward to the time when we shall train our young people to play other
orchestral instruments as well. This is being successfully done even
now in the public schools. My own observation leads me to believe that
talent for pianoforte-playing is quite rare, and that the average child
is more likely to be able to play the violin. What more delightful than
a quiet evening of chamber music in a small room, young and old playing
together? Each person has his own interesting part to play. Each
expresses himself and at the same time conforms to the _ensemble_. This
would be true self-expression under the best kind of discipline.

It is perhaps too much to expect to stem the tide of bad pianoforte
music. Here, as elsewhere, the home influence counts for much. Is it
not the duty of parents to satisfy themselves that the teacher of music
is giving their children the best and nothing else? The teaching of
music in this country has suffered enormously through being detached
from the highest professional standards, and, on the other hand, the
professional standard suffers in being disconnected from the common
life and thought. In other words, anybody who plays the pianoforte
a little can set up in business as a teacher, while, at the same
time, the highly qualified professional teacher often forgets that
he is dealing with a human being who wants to understand music and
whose happiness in dealing with it must ultimately depend on that
understanding.

When children show an aptitude for playing the pianoforte there exists
still the important question of developing their taste. Playing loses
much of its value if there is any lack of musical taste and judgment
on the part of the teacher. An examination of the programmes of what
are called “pupils’ recitals” will reveal how lax some teachers are
in this respect. There is no excuse whatever for giving children poor
music to play, for there is plenty of good music to be had and they can
be taught to like it--_but the teacher must like it also_. Children
are quick to discover a pretense of liking, and it is difficult to
stimulate in them a love for something which you do not love yourself.


VI. THE REAL GOAL

These questions now inevitably arise: “How can children be taught music
itself?” “By what process is it possible for them to become musical?”
Obviously through personal experience and contact with good music, and
with good music only, first by singing beautiful songs to train the ear
and awaken the taste, second by learning how to listen intelligently,
and third (if qualified to do so) by learning to play good music on
some instrument. Intelligent listening to music is obviously such
listening as comprises a complete absorption of all the elements in
the music itself. It is not enough to enjoy the “tune” alone, for
melody is only one means of expression. The listener must be alive
to metric and rhythmic forms, to melodies combined in what is called
“counterpoint,” to that disposition of the various themes, harmonies,
and so forth, which constitutes form in music. The groups of fives, for
example, which persist throughout the second movement of Tschaikovsky’s
“Pathétique Symphony” constitute its salient quality; the steady,
solemn tread in the rhythm of the slow movement of Beethoven’s Seventh
Symphony defines the character of that piece; the weaving of the
separate, individual parts in a composition by Bach is his chief
means of expression, and his music is unintelligible to many people
because they are incapable of answering to so complex an idiom; the
latitude in melody itself is, also, very great, and one needs constant
experience of the melodic line before one can see the beauty in the
more profound melodies of Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms.

What we are seeking to do is to make ourselves complementary to the
music. We need to see that æsthetic pleasure is not by any means
entirely of the senses, but rather of the imagination through training
of the feelings and the mind. We want our listeners to assimilate
all the elements in a piece of music and then to re-create it in the
imagination. It is the office of art to create beauty in such perfect
form as shall make us reflect upon it.

This principle applies, of course, to the appreciation of any artistic
object whatsoever. One cannot appreciate Whistler’s portrait of his
mother by merely realizing that the subject looks like a typical
Victorian dame, any more than one can appreciate Whitman’s “To the
Man-of-War-Bird” by locating Senegal. Whistler’s idea is expressed
through composition, drawing, and color, and each of these qualities
has a subtlety of its own; the pose of the figure is a thing of beauty
in itself; the edge of the picture-frame just showing on the wall, the
arrangement of curves and spots on the curtain, the tone of the whole
canvas--all these make the picture what it is, and all these we must
comprehend and take delight in. Whitman’s poem is a thing of space and
freedom; the sky is the wild bird’s cradle, man is “a speck, a point on
the world’s floating vast”; the poet’s imagination ranges through the
whole created universe and flashes back over vast reaches of time as if
to incarnate again man in the bird. So this music, which reaches our
consciousness through rhythms, melodies, and harmonies, through form
and style, through the delicate filigree of violins, or the triumphant
blare of horns; which says unutterable things by means of silence;
which means nothing and yet means everything,--this Ariel of the
arts,--this, in all its quality,must find echo within us.

Observation, discrimination, reflection; cultivating the memory for
musical phrases and melodies, disciplining the senses, enlarging the
scope of the imagination, nurturing the sense of beauty--these are the
means and the objects of musical education for children. By such a
process we attain in some measure to that joy which is one of the chief
objects of art, and of which our present situation almost completely
deprives us.

So let me say finally that I wage war here against patent nostrums,
against enforced and joyless music-teaching, against the development of
technical proficiency without taste or understanding; and that I uphold
here a process of musical education which has for its object “being
musical,” and which takes into its fold every child, boy or girl, and
keeps them there as man and woman.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] G. Stanley Hall.




CHAPTER III

PUBLIC SCHOOL MUSIC


I. IDEALS OF PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATION

It is characteristic of our compliance in matters educational that of
late years we have seen subject after subject added to the curricula of
our public schools, and have cheerfully voted money for them, without
having much conception of their value or of the results attained
by introducing them. Education is our shibboleth, our formula. The
school diploma and the college degree constitute our new baptism of
conformity. We do not question their authority or their efficacy.
They absolve us. Our public schools have become experimental stations
for the testing of theories, until the demand for more and more
specialization has resulted in an overcrowding of the curricula and
a consequent superficiality in the teaching. “That any man should
die ignorant who is capable of knowledge, that I call a tragedy,”
says Carlyle. But there is a greater tragedy still, which is that
our capability for knowledge may be so overburdened by irrelevant
information that it becomes worthless to us. We study everything and we
know nothing. Our schools become detached from the realities of life
because we pursue so diligently the semblance of those realities.

Our objective is definitely practical. We expect education to fit boys
and girls to cope successfully with the everyday affairs of life, we
frown on anything that savors of the unpractical, and we instinctively
distrust the word “beauty.” We are like Mime who thought that courage
lay in the sword itself. We, too, have the pieces of the broken blade,
and they are as useless to us as they were to him. Of what avail all
this information which we so slowly and painfully acquire? Can it be
put together Mime-fashion? Or is there something that can fuse it? Has
it not all a common source, and is not that source in nature? “Every
object has its roots in central nature and may be exhibited to us so as
to represent the world.” This unity in things, to which Emerson refers,
gives order and sequence to all objects, persons, and ideas; they
become significant and potent, for we see them as they really are. No
one can be said to be educated who fails to apprehend that unification
of all matter, of all thought, of all sensation--that harmony in things
which brings into relation a speck of dust and a star, the individual
and the cosmos. The very thing we fear most in education is the one
thing that tempers all the others--namely, beauty. For in education, as
in everything else, beauty means sequence, order, and harmony; beauty
relates things to each other, multiplies arithmetic by geography,
objects by sounds, acts by feelings. If there were a world with one
human being in it, and only one, his sweetest, gentlest, and most
inevitably perfect act would be to leap-into the mother sea and rejoin
nature. An isolated fact or an unrelated piece of information only
differs in this respect from the human being in that it never was alive.

We pay lip service to beauty. We study poetry, but we deal chiefly with
poets--with their being born and their dying, with the shell of them,
whereas the poet is only valuable for what beauty he brings us. We even
try to extract morals from him, or to find in him codes of conduct,
philosophies, and the like, forgetting Swinburne’s fine saying that
“There are pulpits enough for all preachers in prose; the business of
verse writing is hardly to express convictions; and if some poetry, not
without merit of its kind, has at times dealt with dogmatic morality,
it is all the worse and all the weaker for that.” One of the prime
objects of the study of English should be to instill in the student a
love of English poetry. But we are afraid of it; we distrust it, or we
think it effeminate. (It means nothing that we are now praising “free
verse,” for we are only interested in the first half of the term, and
that is not applicable to poetry, since no verse worth having ever has
been or can be free. We nibble.)

But poetry does, at least, express itself in words, and words can be
punctuated, and spelled, and parsed and scanned, and, above all, words
provide material for examinations. You cannot do any of these things
with music, for it consists in mere sounds meaning nothing that any one
can find out. We do allow music to enter a corner of our educational
sanctuary, and then we slam the door on her and leave her there until
June when we expect her to come forth garlanded for the graduation
exercises. The taxpayer attends these exercises and listens to the
singing of the children in that complacent mood which he commonly
assumes when he thinks he is getting his money’s worth, although he
very likely knows that his own public school education in music did
nothing whatever for him.

What are the claims of music as a means of educating the young? To some
educational administrators it seems to have almost no justification.
“What can be accomplished by it?” they ask. “Singing is not necessary
as a factor in life.” “Music is of little importance in a work-a-day
world.” So argue the school men who want “results” as they call them.
But the real object of education should be first to make human beings
capable of hearing and seeing intelligently, and of using their hands
skillfully, and then to train the mind so that it can receive and
assimilate knowledge and turn it into wisdom. There are a few school
authorities who see music as an important part of such education, but
most of them--being in themselves unconscious of its power and of its
value--only accept it because other people similarly placed have done
so, or as a relief from other studies, or as a means of enlivening
public school exhibitions. That there is something in our natures which
music fulfills and satisfies; that great men have given expression
to their ideas through it; that the understanding and appreciation
of their utterances depends on the training of the ear and of the
imagination, and that, when this training has been completed, a man
or woman has access to a whole world of beauty--all this the average
school man does not see. Nor can he be expected to see it, for he
has never experienced it in himself. But he should be convinced by
the phenomena; by the large number of people who derive enjoyment
and stimulation from great music; by the persistence of the love for
it; even, perhaps, by the colossal sums spent on it. But he cannot
dispel his distrust of a study whose results are illusive; he often
sees it badly administered, and is unable to remedy the condition, so
he leaves it to its fate. The one medium of human expression that is
universal, that transcends language, that knows no distinctions save
such as it seeks out itself in our own souls; that speaks to the
tiniest child and to his grandfather in common terms; that does _not_
deal in beliefs, or in dogma, or in events, or things, or persons, or
localities--this he suspects! Put all this on his educational scales; a
few lessons in arithmetic will outweigh it. The passion for categorical
facts, arranged in methodical sequence term by term, year by year, and
culminating in a sky-rocket burst, every fact blazing up separately for
an instant as though it really were alive, and then going out while
the charred embers fall far apart on a patient earth--this is called
Education! But this passion is almost ineradicable--is, indeed, one of
the most common of human failings. It is what is called in these days
“efficiency”: that is, a sort of nose-on-the-grindstone persistency in
detail entirely oblivious of those larger aspects of any case which
really decide its destiny. Systems, categories, precedents; these are
safe. Why wander from beaten paths? Individual aspiration, a desire for
beauty--these are dangerous. We have ceased memorizing the names of
rivers, or the capitals of Patagonia and Bolivia, but we still cling
tightly to “useful” subjects, and we still test our education by
weighing it in June.

I propose, then, first, to examine the claims of music as a subject to
be taught in our public schools; second, to examine into prevailing
methods of teaching it; third, to investigate the results now obtained;
and finally, to suggest ways of bettering our situation.


II. THE VALUE OF MUSIC IN PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATION

In the last chapter I referred to the qualities in music which make it
especially valuable for children, and what I said there applies with
equal or even greater force here. Any one who has compared town or
city life in this country and in Europe, and has seen what a pleasure,
and what a civilizing influence music may become when it is properly
taught in childhood, must realize how great a loss our people sustain
by the neglect of singing. We are only now beginning to realize
how long it takes to weld a diverse people into one by means of an
intellectual conception of nationality. The thin bond of self-interest,
the advantage of “getting on” in the world--these keep us together in
ordinary times, but in a great crisis these bonds break. The leaven of
sentiment is needed. We want a common sympathy; we want above all some
means of expression for that sympathy. There have been of late numerous
great meetings at which the feelings of men and women have expended
themselves in shouts, in cheers, in the clapping of hands, and in other
inarticulate methods of expressing emotions. What would not a song
have done for these thousands--a song they all knew and loved? Are we
forever to be dumb?

Our hope is in the children, to whom music is of inestimable value.
In the first place (as I have already pointed out) music supplies the
only means of bringing young children into actual and intimate contact
with beauty. In the kindergarten or in the early grades of our public
schools children are capable of singing, and love to sing, simple
songs which, within their limited scope, are quite perfect, whereas
their capacity for drawing, or for appreciating forms and colors
is comparatively slight. In music children find a natural means of
expression for that inherent quality of idealism which is a part of
their nature. When children sing together their natures are disciplined
while each child at the same time expresses its own individuality.
Activity of ear, eye, and mind together tends to cultivate quickness
of decision and accuracy of thinking. In the matter of rhythmic
coördination alone music justifies itself. Rhythmic movements to music
have long since come to be recognized as a means of mental and physical
development. All sorts of interesting and stimulating exercises can be
used in connection with the teaching of songs to little children, and
any one who has ever watched a child’s development through intelligent
instruction in singing and in rhythmic exercises must have realized
how keen its perception becomes and how valuable to its general
intelligence the training is. So important is training in rhythmic
movement that it should be a part, not only of all musical education,
but of all primary education everywhere.

Singing beautiful songs prepares children by the best possible means
for an intelligent understanding of the compositions of the great
masters which, for lack of this preparation, many adults never
comprehend. The educational administrator who denies a great composer
the distinction he gives to a great writer is going against the
testimony of generations of cultivated and educated people all over
the world, and, moreover, is tacitly acknowledging that he believes
greatness to be a matter of mere outward expression. The element in
Shakespeare’s writings, for example, which reveals his greatness is
the same element that reveals Beethoven’s--namely, an imaginative,
beautiful and true concept or idea of human life. Beethoven is as true
as Shakespeare. The same fancy, the same daring, the same grandeur, the
same extravagance of imagination, and the same fidelity to life are
found in each. That one uses words and the other mere sounds affects
the case not at all, or if at all, in favor of music, since these
elements or qualities of life are expressed more directly and more
intensely in music than in words.

Yes, there is every reason for giving music a real place in the
curriculum save one, and that is this: you cannot give an examination
in it. Fatal defect! No A + or A - for the child to take home proudly
to its parents; on a certain day at a certain hour you cannot find out
by a set test what, of the beautiful thing we call music, a child has
in its heart and soul. The result you hope to gain consists chiefly in
a love of good music, and a joy in singing it--a result that is likely
to affect the happiness of the child all its life long; the whole
tendency of singing in schools has been to civilize the child, to make
it happy, and to help its physical and mental coördination; yet you
deny the value of such training, you refuse to give it a real place in
your curriculum, you call it a fad or a frill. What an extraordinary
attitude for an educational administration to assume! The world is,
then, merely a place of eating and drinking, of mechanical routine, of
facts. There are to be no dreams; the flowers and brooks and mountains,
the sky, birds’ songs and the whole fantasy of life--these are nothing.
Beautiful objects in which the eye delights, beautiful sounds that
fill the soul with happiness and create for us a perfect world of our
own, these are useless because they won’t submit to an examination in
June and can’t be made to figure in a diploma. How many young people,
I wonder, graduate from our institutions of learning with nothing
_but_ a diploma? Would it not be of great value to the children if they
were taught to see and to hear vividly and intelligently, to be alive
to all beautiful objects, to love a few beautiful poems, to have the
beginnings of a taste for literature, to be able to sing fine songs, to
take part in choral singing, and to know well a few pieces by Mozart
or Schubert? Do not all great things establish relationship and do not
all little things accentuate differences? What education is better than
that which unifies the individual with the universal? Is not this whole
world of fine literature, painting, sculpture, and music in the very
highest sense, then, an education to the individual?

We march in endless file along a hard-paved way out of the sun, our
goal a place where _use_ holds sway. To reach the goal and begin our
labors under the lash, catching a glimpse only now and then of stars,
of flowers, of brooks, of green fields--only a glimpse, for _use_ holds
us fast. After a time we forget them altogether as _use_ fastens its
grip upon us more securely. We plod onward, machine-like, until all
sense of beauty is dead, and the world is a treadmill of money-getting
and of trivial pleasures. Then our blindness reacts on our children.
We have forgotten the impulse of our childhood. The love for beautiful
things has left us, and we have no longer a sense of their value. Must
our children continue to suffer for this? Must they, too, become the
slaves of use?


III. FALSE METHODS OF TEACHING

That compliance of ours to which I have referred is nowhere more
evident than in the large sums we spend on the teaching of music,
and in our ignorance of the results. School boards and school
superintendents usually possess little knowledge of the subject and
have no means of knowing the quality and the effect of music teaching
save by such evidences as are supplied by the singing of the children
at the end of the school year. No one asks what the one thousand or the
fifty thousand dollars spent by the school board earns. The money is
appropriated and expended on salaries, music books, etc., and there the
matter is left hanging, as it were, in the air, and not to be heard
from again until the end of the school year. No committee supervises
the selection of the books or the methods of teaching. The supervisor
is in autocratic control. The system is like an inverted pyramid
propped up by an occasional show of singing, by the fallacious excuse
that singing is a relaxation after burdensome tasks (fallacious because
such relaxation by singing could be carried on without the expensive
paraphernalia of a school music system), but most of all supported
and fostered by the equally fallacious belief that reading music “at
sight,” so called, is an end in itself. So completely divorced is it
from such control as is exercised over other subjects that it has
become the prey of theorists who have accumulated around it a mass of
pedagogical paraphernalia quite unknown in any other form of music
teaching, and essentially artificial and encumbering.

I have attended conventions of teachers where all the interest centered
in pedagogical methods, and in the discussions of artificial terms and
theories. I have met teachers who say they discourage the children
from singing--because it ruins their voices! and who confine their
instruction to the theory of music. The fetish of sight-singing has
cast its blight over the teaching of little children so that instead
of letting them sing by ear simple and beautiful songs,--which nearly
every child loves to do,--they are taught at the age of five or six
years the mysteries of intervals, etc. And since the time divisions
of music present difficulties too great for their young minds, the
vertical measure lines are discarded, thus obliterating the accents and
taking away from music one of its most fundamental elements. This makes
necessary the substitution of purely empirical terms to describe the
time values of quarter notes, eighth notes, and so forth, such as “type
one,” “type two”; or artificial syllabic terms are piled up one upon
another until such a monstrosity as _tafate-fetifi_ results.

It is obvious that a long experience of music through singing should
precede any instruction as to the time values of notes, and that if
a child has sung many times by ear the sounds represented by these
artificial terms, and has continued to sing by ear for two years
or more, and has stored up a series of musical impressions that
have developed its musical taste and instinct, and has mastered
the rudiments of numbers, the teaching of the notes becomes a much
simpler and more natural process, involving no other terms than those
ordinarily in use in music. You can then call a note by its generally
accepted name--“half,” “quarter,” “eighth,” etc.

How did this all come about? Primarily through the indifference of
the public, and through the incapability of the school authorities to
control the teaching. Never having been so educated in music as to
realize that it contains the highest kind of educational possibilities,
parents take little interest in the music their children learn in
school. The connection between music and life is lost. The supervisor
may, or may not be a good musician; he may be entirely indifferent to
the higher possibilities of music as a factor in education; his taste
may never have been properly formed. He is likely to be helpless even
though he feels the need of reform because he needs music books, and
has to take what he can buy. The making of music books for schools has
become too much a matter of commercial competition, and particularly
of commercial propaganda, and this latter condition is fostered by
the summer schools for supervisors controlled and operated by the
publishers of school music books. The result of all this is that a
cumbersome pedagogical system has become firmly entrenched in many
American towns and cities.

One of the greatest difficulties connected with public school music
teaching is the inability of some of the grade teachers to teach music.
The daily lesson is given by her. The music teacher visits each room
once in two, three, or even four weeks. It is not necessarily the grade
teacher’s fault if she cannot teach music well, because the training
given her in the grade schools and normal school may have been quite
inadequate. But teach music she must--as a part of her regular duties.
My own observation leads me to believe that a good many grade teachers
are capable of doing this work well, that few do it as well as they
might do if they were given more training, and that some teach so badly
that it results in more harm than good. In any case I am opposed to
any transference of the daily lesson from the grade teachers to an
expert, not because I think the expert would not do it in some ways
better, but because it would mean a very large increase in the expense
of our schools and because I believe that only a few grade teachers
are incapable under proper training of giving a satisfactory music
lesson. Furthermore, I believe in keeping the music lesson as a bond
of sympathy between the grade teacher and the children. Singing is an
entirely natural art for any human being who begins it in childhood
and pursues it through youth. I look forward to the day when we shall
all sing. I object to the displacement of the grade teacher in the
one function of school life which is intimate, free, and beautiful,
in which facts, members, places, events, names are forgotten, and in
which the spirit of each child issues forth _under the discipline of
beauty_. (I place these words in italics because I am constantly being
told that the great thing in the education of children is to give
them self-expression; to which I reply that self-expression except
under discipline--using the word in its larger sense--has never helped
either the individual or the race.) We must look to the normal schools
for this improvement in the ability of our teachers to teach music,
and the normal schools, in turn, must expect our high schools to send
forth their graduates, properly taught in music, so that normal schools
will not have to spend time (as they often do now) supplementing the
imperfections of the earlier training.

At present we are moving in a vicious circle. Many of our normal
schools still preserve something of that artificial pedagogy to which I
have referred, and still send out teachers who are, _humanly speaking_,
ill-fitted to lead the children in music. (I refer to the human element
in the matter because it is impossible to teach music properly if you
have not had experience with the best of it, and if you do not love the
best more than any other. So long as our normal schools lay too great
stress on the technique of teaching music at the expense of the greater
thing, just so long will our schools suffer. And it is easily possible
for the normal school authorities to be deceived as to what is the best
music, as well as by a brave showing of musical performance.) The real
failure in the administration of music is due to a false ideal. And
it is in this mistaken ideal or purpose that the crux of the whole
matter lies. Nearly the whole stress of teaching is laid on expert
sight-reading of music. Go into a schoolroom with a supervisor to hear
his class sing and he will almost invariably exhibit to you with pride
the capacity of the children to sing at sight. He will ask you to put
something impromptu on the blackboard as a test of their proficiency.
He will exhibit to you classes of very young children who have already
learned to read notes and who can sing all sorts of simple exercises
from the staff.

What is meant by the term “sight-singing”? It means, if it means
anything, that a person shall be able to sing correctly at the first
trial his part in any piece of vocal music which he has never seen or
heard before. And this, which we spend our money for, is an entirely
artificial attainment, since in real life we are almost never required
to do it. “Sight-singing” has become a shibboleth. What we want is a
reasonable capacity for reading music, for that is all we are called
upon to do in actual life. In choral societies and choirs all over
this country the number of singers who can read music at sight is
negligible, and there is probably not one of them who could master
at once the intricacies of modern choral writing. Let us then teach
children to read music by giving them as many trials as is necessary,
and let them gradually acquire such a familiarity with intervals
and with rhythmic figures as will make it possible for them to sing
with other people, and enjoy doing so. We shall then get rid of an
artificial ideal and have just so much more time in which to cultivate
music for its own sake. It goes without saying that the vast majority
of the children in our public schools never attain to that expertness
which is the present objective of the teaching. So we have a double
failure--in ideal and in practice. (This is not the place for a
discussion of the various methods of teaching sight-singing. The method
commonly used in this country is derived from English practice and we
have ignored the much more accurate and scientific systems of France
and Germany.)

The supervisor, who takes so much pride in the capacity of his pupils
to sing at sight, ought to be chiefly interested in something much more
important--namely, their ability to sing a beautiful piece of music
and particularly their joy in doing so, for that is the only real
justification for his presence there. Many supervisors seem to have
almost forgotten that music is a thing of beauty and that the only
way to keep it alive in a child’s heart is to teach the child to sing
beautiful songs. Constant contact with inferior songs for children may,
indeed, have so affected the supervisor’s taste that he himself can no
longer detect the difference between good and bad.


IV. GOOD OR BAD MUSIC?

For eight years, then, in our public schools children are taught--as
far as may be--to sing at sight. Is there a fine song which presents
a certain difficulty, it is placed in the book at the point where
that difficulty arises, and is treated as a sight-reading test. It is
subjected to analysis as to its melodic progressions, each of which is
taken up as a technical problem. This is precisely the method so often
and so fatally used in connection with poetry. The Skylark’s wings are
clipped; the Grecian Urn becomes an archæological specimen; the Eve of
Saint Agnes a date in the almanac.

This brings me to the most important part of the whole matter. If
expert sight-singing is not only a false ideal, but one impossible of
general attainment in public schools under the conditions at present
existing, what does justify our expenditure of such large sums of
money? The sole justification for it is to bring children to love the
best music, and so to train their taste for it as to make them capable
of discriminating between good and bad. Now a thorough test of the
children in the kindergarten or the lower primary grades of any public
school anywhere will surely reveal that such children start life with
the makings of good taste in music. Nature is prodigal here--prodigal
and faithful. In the most remote villages in this country, in purely
industrial communities, among the poor and among the rich (both having
forgotten), children love good songs. It is their natural inheritance.
No excess of materialism in the generations affects it in the least.
This is the primitive endowment; deep down in human character there
lies a harmony of adjustment with nature. Overlay it as you may with
custom or habit; sully it with luxury; it still persists, for without
it human life cannot be. This idealistic basis of human life, which is
never destroyed, appears fresh and unstained in children, and in their
song it bubbles up as from a pure spring.[5]

It has been a matter of frequent comment that there has been no such
increase in choral singing either in town or city as our public
school music teaching should lead us to expect. In fact the countless
young people who graduate from our schools seem to make almost no
impression on choral singing. It still remains the least of our musical
activities. It is as difficult as ever to secure people who care enough
for the practice of singing to come to rehearsals. Voluntary choir
singing, for the pleasure to be derived from it, is rare. Are not our
public schools partly responsible for this condition? Is not that
natural taste and love for good music, to which I have just referred,
allowed to lapse and finally almost to disappear? And is not this
largely the result of too much technical instruction, and too little
good music? I know that there are many more distractions for children
than formerly; I know that the home influence in music is slight, and
that parents assume less responsibility for their children than they
used to do. But, granting all this, the musical instruction in public
schools does not fulfill its proper function, nor can it hope to do so
until it changes its ideals.

There is no doubt whatever that, speaking generally, the best music
with which to train the taste of young children is that known as
“folk-song.” The supposition that any musician is capable of composing
a fine enduring song suitable for children is false in its very
essence. The constant appearance of new songs for children and their
inevitable disappearance in the next generation is evidence enough
that this is so, apart from the unmistakable evidence in the songs
themselves. In reality the good tune is right, the poor tune wrong;
the good tune conforms to, is a part of nature; the poor tune is false
in quantity and in sentiment, and not a part of nature. The fine tune
is straightforward, honest, and genuine in sentiment; the inferior
tune professes to be so, but it is not. Fine simple tunes of the kind
suitable for children to sing have been composed,--“Way Down upon the
Suwanee River” is an example,--but they are very few in number. The
only safeguard is to keep chiefly to the old melodies whose quality
has been proved. And since the number of fine folk-tunes is more than
sufficient for our purpose, and since most of them are not copyrighted,
there would seem to be no reason whatever why they should not
constitute the larger part of the music we give our children to sing in
their early years of school life.

I have said that children like real tunes in preference to false ones.
We have therefore a perfectly sound basis upon which to build. But it
must not be forgotten that singing is in itself an agreeable pastime
to children and that their taste can be lowered as well as raised.
With their fundamental good taste to build on, we can be reasonably
sure of accomplishing our purpose if we provide them all through their
school life with the best music and no other. This is not done and the
failure of our school music to justify itself can be attributed chiefly
to this.

Nowhere is this more evident than in the very place where it will
do the most harm--namely, in the kindergarten. And this is true of
kindergartens generally. In the process of providing very young
children with suitable words for their songs--which in the kindergarten
are considered of first importance--the effect of inferior music seems
to have been entirely ignored. In other words, the one sense through
which young children receive their most vivid impressions has been
systematically and persistently violated. I have examined a great many
song books used in American kindergartens and I have never found one
that was really suitable for the purpose of training the musical taste
of young children. Our craving for a complete pedagogical system is
characteristic; it is our refuge, our bulwark. Instead of facing actual
problems as they are, we take some ready-made system--which some other
perplexed person has made for a shelter--and proceed to adopt it _in
toto_. I mean by this that the custom of kindergarten authorities is
to buy a book in the open market--a book whose sole guarantee is that
it is for sale. It probably contains inferior music, but the purchaser
asks no questions. Now an enterprising and well-equipped teacher could
gather together during a summer holiday twenty-five simple folk-songs,
could have suitable words written for them, and could have them
mimeographed (if more copies were needed), and put into use in her
school. I say nothing of the benefit to her of doing this.

It is obvious, then, that our public school music labors under great
difficulties. The classes are too large,--sometimes forty-five children
in a room,--the music lesson period is too short; the music teacher
visits each room at too great intervals; the grade teacher is perhaps
not properly qualified to teach music and the head master’s interest
in it may be perfunctory. The study itself is, therefore, irregular,
as must be the case when such conditions as these exist. Yet we are
trying to produce _expert_ results. Why not say to ourselves that since
our population as a whole is not yet actively interested in the best
music, and since the children are unlikely to hear much of it outside
the school, and since by nature and habit and association there is
really nothing in our musical life to justify spending our money on
teaching expert sight-singing to children--the undertaking being in
a sense anomalous and detached; why not say to ourselves: “We must
first of all teach our children to love the best music, and then we
must train them to read it, not necessarily ‘at sight,’ but to read
it well enough to satisfy all the demands likely to be made in that
direction in after life.”[6] I would sweep away half the pedagogical
paraphernalia of our public school music teaching. I believe much more
valuable results could be secured by constant contact with the best
music, and continued observation of it, with a minimum of technical
exercises. I believe the processes of music to have no significance
whatever except as they appear in great compositions, and that
constant contact with and observation of fine music is more valuable
than the study of the rules by which it is made, or the technique by
which it is produced. In music as in poetry we deduce the rules and
laws from the artistic objects themselves. The composer and the poet
are to us what nature is to them.


V. ATTEMPTS AT REFORM

I have drawn the foregoing conclusions from an extended observation
and experience of public school music, and I ought to add--lest the
record seem too despairing--that in a considerable number of places
intelligent and open-minded men and women have been doing their best to
stem the tide of inferior music and of artificial methods of teaching.
During the last two years I have been serving on an unpaid advisory
committee appointed by the School Committee of the City of Boston
to improve the teaching of music in the public schools. The School
Committee of Boston consists of five people elected by the people. They
became aware of the inefficiency of the teaching through an independent
investigation carried on by Dr. A. T. Davison, of Harvard University
(who is chairman of our committee), and they asked him to form a
committee to help them. Boston was spending some forty thousand dollars
for public school music. During one school year the members of our
committee visited schools, taking note of what they heard and saw, and
finally each member submitted a written report to the chairman. These
were made the basis for a general report to the School Committee by
whom it was accepted.

The Boston teaching was especially weak in dealing with rhythm, and
for a perfectly simple reason. Rhythm was taught, not as action, which
it is, but as symbol, which it is not. The various rhythmic figures
were taught, in other words, through the mind instead of through the
body. These rhythmic figures were given arbitrary names (to which I
have already referred), and the children, looking at the symbols,
were told the strange name given to them, and, sitting quite still,
produced the required sounds. The teachers did not even beat the time.
The usual answer we got when asking about rhythm was, “Oh, they feel
the rhythm.” This may have been true, but, if it were, the children
were extreme individualists! This sort of rhythmic teaching is common
in the United States and the defect is a grave one. The arithmetical
complications of rhythm in music should never be taught to little
children at all. Just as they should sing the melody by imitating the
teacher, so they should be taught the rhythm by imitating, _in action_,
the time value of the notes. A child who has sung a simple folk-song
many times, and has danced, or marched, or clapped his hands in exact
time and rhythm with the notes, can be taught later the pitch names
and the time names of those notes without the slightest difficulty and
without any subterfuge whatever. In a schoolroom containing some forty
children, and with the space largely occupied by desks and seats, it
is, of course, impossible to carry on any extended exercises in rhythm.
But every effort should be made to teach musical rhythms as action
before they are taught as sounds. Whenever possible classes should be
taken to the assembly room, where there is a sufficiently large open
floor space, for such exercises.

But the most distressing condition in the Boston schools--and this
would be more or less true everywhere in our country--was that all
the children in the kindergarten and primary grades were learning
such songs as would eventually destroy their natural taste for fine
music. This is the one great indictment against public school music
in the United States--that it has been made to order for schoolbooks,
and to fit technical problems, and that it consequently fails to keep
the allegiance of children. Nothing but the best will ever do that,
and until we supply the best our school music is bound to fail. Our
committee, as a preliminary step toward reform, recommended that all
instruction in reading music should be postponed until the last half of
the third grade. This allowed us to institute singing by ear and at the
same time to teach rhythm by beating time, clapping hands, marching,
etc. A book of folk-songs was compiled by Dr. Davison and myself and
was adopted and published[7] by the School Committee. The greatest
difficulty here has been to get suitable verses for the simpler songs.
We have spent much time over this one matter and have not, even
then, always been successful. Good verses for very young children are
difficult to secure, and--to instance how painstaking the process of
making a book of such songs is--we have sometimes received half a dozen
sets of verses for a simple melody without finding one that we thought
suitable.

It is perhaps too soon to draw very definite conclusions from the
results of these reforms in the Boston schools. One thing is certain:
a very large number of children five, six, and seven years of age are
now singing really beautiful songs without seeing any music at all and
without being told anything whatever about the notes, rests, intervals,
etc., which occur in them. Upon the experience of these two and one
half years of singing by ear we shall build up skill in singing by note
and this skill will be acquired with much greater ease than would be
otherwise possible. It is also worth noting that the expense of music
books in these grades (and the same will be true of later grades) is
more than cut in half. In the kindergarten and the first primary grades
the children sing without a book; in the second and third grades they
use a simple and inexpensive book of words, while the teachers in these
grades use the small collection of folk-songs already referred to.

In the Boston schools ninety minutes a week is given to drawing, and
sixty minutes a week to music. It is obvious that a daily lesson
in music twelve minutes long is entirely inadequate for proper
instruction. An increase to twenty minutes a day, or to three
half-hours a week is highly desirable. In many schools entirely too
much time is devoted to preparing music for the graduation exercises.
Failing an examination, what is there left but an exhibition?

It is a task of real difficulty to reform any strongly entrenched
system or method of education. What is conclusively demonstrated
as a more sensible method runs against self-interest, tradition,
intellectual immovability (to use a moderate term!), and other even
more violent opposition. The reforms we are instituting in Boston need
the combined force of all the persons in authority, of all the teaching
staff, and of public opinion. No one of these forces is being fully
exerted owing to circumstances over which we have no control. But we
have accomplished something, for we have reduced the expense and we
have simplified the teaching; and each of these improvements was sadly
needed.


VI. OTHER ACTIVITIES IN SCHOOL MUSIC

One of the encouraging signs of our advancement is in orchestral
playing. School orchestras have become important features of school
life, and the excellence of some of the orchestral playing is
remarkable. It often outshines the singing, and it is frequently
self-contained, being under the direction, not of the music teachers,
but of the head master or one of his assistants. In this department of
music teaching, as in the singing lessons, much depends on the attitude
of the head master. In our Boston schools there are notable examples
of fine music fostered and sustained by enthusiastic head masters who
lay great stress on that as contrasted with mere technical expertness.
Credit toward the high-school diploma is now given in Boston for study
of the pianoforte or an orchestral instrument outside school hours and
with independent teachers. Lists are issued to indicate the standard
of music and of performance for each grade, and certificates of hours
of practice are required of parents. This system of credits depends for
its success on securing competent examiners not otherwise connected
with the schools, for by this means poor teachers are gradually
eliminated. Many schoolrooms are provided with phonographs which may
be a powerful factor in building up or in breaking down the taste of
children. An approved list of records for the Boston schools is in
course of preparation in order to eliminate undesirable music and to
increase the usefulness of the instruments.

Singing by ear spontaneously and without technical instruction, but
rather for the joy of doing it, and for the formation of the taste
on good models, is the proper beginning of all musical education.
Such experience, coupled with proper rhythmic exercises, constitutes
a real basis, not only for sight-singing, but for performance on
any instrument. No child should be admitted for possible credit in
pianoforte playing or be allowed to enter violin classes until so
prepared in singing and in rhythm. The pianoforte neither reveals nor
corrects the defective ear; the violin, on the other hand, does reveal
it, though it does not necessarily correct it. Defective rhythm can be
properly corrected only through actual rhythmic motions of the body.

Many high schools now offer courses in what is called “The Appreciation
of Music.” The success of such courses depends to a considerable extent
on the quality of music used in the primary and grammar grades. If
the children have been singing inferior music for eight years, the
difficulties of teaching them to appreciate the best is correspondingly
increased. If, on the contrary, their taste has been carefully formed
on good models, the introduction to great music has already been made.
In studying symphonies, for example, one would begin with Haydn whose
symphonies and chamber music are largely based on folk-melodies. In
short, courses in appreciation should be the culmination of the musical
education of our young people. Such courses should have for their
object, first and foremost, the cultivation of the musical memory,
for this is an absolute essential to anybody who hopes to listen to
music intelligently. After this has been accomplished, the student
should listen to simple instrumental pieces whose style and form should
be explained, and the explanation should be as untechnical[8] as
possible. Each of the properties or qualities of music is susceptible
of treatment on the broad grounds of æsthetics, and one’s success in
teaching young people to understand it depends considerably on the
ability so to present it. The instructor and an assistant should play
on a pianoforte all the music studied, or, failing that, a mechanical
piano-player should be used.

And now let me say that the most important and beneficial step any
community could take toward improving its school music would be to
secure a supervisor who is untainted by current American pedagogical
theories of sight-singing, who will not attempt to teach little
children something they cannot possibly understand, and who will use
nothing but the best music from the kindergarten to the high school.
No community is really helpless if it will bestir itself. If our public
school music teaching were well devised and properly administered
and if our children were taught to sing nothing but the best music,
we might look forward to a time, not far distant, when a generation
of music-lovers would take the place of the present generation of
music-tasters. Our young people would gravitate naturally into choirs
and singing societies. Groups of people would gather together to sing;
families would sing together; there would be chamber music parties; we
should pass many a quiet domestic evening at home listening to Mozart
and Beethoven instead of playing bridge or going to a moving-picture
theater. The whole body of American music would be affected by the
influx of those young people who would want the best. In course of
time, perhaps,--although one must not expect the millennium,--the vapid
drawing-room song would disappear along with the tinkling pianoforte
show-piece. ’Cellists would play something better than pieces by
Popper; the thirteenth concerto by Viotti and the thirtieth Hungarian
rhapsodie would be relegated to that limbo where now repose (we hope
in death) the “Battle of Prague” and “Monastery Bells.” This cannot be
brought about casually. We must set about it; and the place to begin is
in our public schools.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] A certain small proportion of children are backward in music,
but the possibility of teaching them to sing has long since been
satisfactorily demonstrated. They need special attention which it is
difficult to give in public schools. They should, I think, never be
taken from their seats in the room and placed at one side, but should
be asked to listen to the other children, and occasionally to sing with
them, the teacher standing near for help and encouragement.

[6] I do not mean by the foregoing that I consider a fair degree of
expertness in reading music “at sight” an impossible attainment for
children. What I have said has been entirely in reference to our public
schools as they are at present constituted, and to the arrangements now
made for the teaching of music. The teaching of sight-singing requires
the services of an expert, more time than our schools now give, and a
more scientific method than that now employed.

[7] Now published by the Boston Music Company, 26 West Street, Boston,
Massachusetts.

[8] Counterpoint, for example, is, strictly, note against note, two
melodies parallel to each other; æsthetically, counterpoint consists in
illuminating, illustrating, or developing, a phrase or theme by _parts_
of _itself_--what in architecture would be described as making the
ornament grow out of the structure.




CHAPTER IV

COMMUNITY MUSIC


I. MUSIC BY PROXY

In the preceding chapters I have dealt with special musical subjects,
and have constantly referred to music as a distinct and independent art
having its own reasons for existence. I have dealt, also, with some of
its special functions as well as with its relation to the education
of children. In the present chapter it is my purpose to discuss music
in its relation to communities large and small, and this necessitates
treating it on the broadest possible grounds.

By community music I mean, first, music in which all the people of a
community take part; second, music which is produced by certain members
of the community for the benefit and pleasure of the others; and third,
music which, while actually performed by paid artists, is nevertheless
somehow expressive of the will of the community as a whole. I shall
take no refuge behind generalities or theories of æsthetics. I want to
reach everybody, including the person who says, “I don’t know anything
about music but I know what I like,” and that other extraordinary
person who says, “I know only two tunes, one of which is ‘Yankee
Doodle’”--each of these statements being quite incomprehensible, since
it is a poor person indeed who doesn’t know what he likes, and anybody
who knows “Yankee Doodle” has no excuse whatever for not knowing what
the other tune is, or, so far as that goes, what any other tune is. I
am, in short, appealing on common grounds about a common thing. My only
question is this: If there is a means of interesting, delighting, and
elevating a large number of people at very small expense, by something
which they can all do together and which brings them all into sympathy
with one another, and if the result of this coöperation is to produce
something beautiful, is it not worth doing? I intend to make as full an
answer to this question as space permits.

It is in the “doing” and the “doing together” that the crux of the
matter lies, for a purely external connection with music never brings
about a complete understanding of it. It is no exaggeration to say
that our connection with nearly all artistic things is largely
external. We do not draw; we do not train the eye to see or the hand
to feel and touch, and artistic objects remain in a measure strange
and unintelligible to us. The whole tendency of modern life and of
modern education is to delegate those functions which have to do with
our inner being. We delegate our religion to a preacher or to a dogma;
we delegate our education to a curriculum smoothed out to a common
level; some of us even delegate the forming of an opinion on passing
events to a leader who presents them to us in a “current events” class.
The religion, the knowledge, the opinion of many a person belongs to
some one else. Many a man prefers an inferior novel because the author
not only writes it, but reads it for him, whereas to the wise man the
author might almost be called an amanuensis. In any case, a writer
of genuine power never does more than his share. He depends on us to
complete him. And in like case, if we expect to understand and love
music we must use it; the composer depends on us as much as the author
does.

This external connection with music and this lack of intimacy with the
thing itself naturally leads us to lay stress on the performance of
it. We revel in technique and we exalt the personalities of players and
singers. In our opera houses we are satisfied only when we have an “all
star” cast by whom we expect to be astonished rather than delighted and
elevated. Now, fine singing, as such, is of little importance save as
a means of reproducing fine music. If fine singing means a sacrifice
of the musical effect; if it destroys the _ensemble_; if it limits the
repertoire--then it is not worth the sacrifice. Why should it ever do
so? Simply because opera-goers suffer it, and for no other reason in
the world. One merely needs to mention a reasonable plan of opera--such
as has been carried out for generations in French, Italian, and German
cities--to be laughed at by those devotees who have sat for years
at the feet of magnificence warming themselves in the effulgence of
gilt and jewels. So it is with solo recitals and orchestral concerts.
One continually hears people discussing the technique of pianists
and violinists, or the comparative merits of our various orchestras.
Local pride--the last thing in the world to connect with artistic
judgment--asserts itself in favor of one orchestra or another, until
it would almost seem that the only purpose of having an orchestra was
to excel all the others. How often, on the contrary, do we hear the
music itself intelligently discussed? In short, we are trying to be
musical vicariously by means of an occasional performance by other
people of music the greater part of which is unfamiliar and, therefore,
unintelligible to us. This is like trying to be religious through going
to church once a week and, sitting passively, being preached and sung
at! The most musical communities are not those where all the music of
the year is crowded into a festival of three or four days, but those
where there is the most real music made at home. A German musical
festival used to be the culmination of a whole year of healthy musical
activity, and the occasion for the production of new works and a wide
variety of old ones. An English or an American festival is, first of
all, an opportunity to hear “The Messiah,” and secondly, to hear a
famous soloist. The attendance on those two occasions is always much
larger than at any others. Is it not true that all the higher functions
of the soul of a man or a woman or of a community can be preserved
only by being exercised?

In what follows I shall try to show how we may escape from the
conditions in which we now too complacently rest. The material for the
change is abundant, for there is in every community much more love of
music than ever appears; the means are simple and inexpensive, for only
a few dollars worth of good music are needed, with a room in which to
practice, a piano and a leader. Let us make a start toward a sincere
and intimate understanding of music through making it ourselves. Let us
give up criticism of other people and begin to construct. Then shall we
learn to see music as it is and to value it accordingly.


II. OUR MUSICAL ACTIVITIES

As a preliminary to this discussion it will be well to look at the
present status of music among us, and to see how near we come to this
necessary intimacy with the art.

In any small American community the first impression one gets about
music is that it is useful to fill up gaps. At the theater, before
public meetings, at social affairs of one sort or another, music
is performed to a ceaseless hum of conversation or while people are
entering and leaving. The art becomes, in consequence, like the
cracking of the whip before the team starts, or like the perfunctory
speeches and gestures of social amenities; it is nothing in itself, and
falls in our estimation accordingly. It is true that, at such times,
only trivial music is usually played, but this only makes the situation
worse, because, after all, it passes as music. A bad piece of music
at the theater or while one is dining in a restaurant is merely an
annoyance; a good piece beats its head against a flood of conversation,
tinkling glasses and other disturbances, and is lost; one feels as
though its composer had been insulted. All this incidental music must
be partly due to the decline in conversation. We are relieved of all
responsibility save an occasional “yes” or “no” shouted above the din.

Real musical activity in the average small community is limited to a
very small number of its inhabitants. Only a few people sing; a much
smaller number play some musical instrument. There are, here and there,
choirs made up of volunteer singers, but the spirit that animated the
old choirs--the spirit which Hardy has celebrated so lovingly in “Under
the Greenwood Tree”--has disappeared. Hymn-singing in church is often
distressingly bad, and with good reason, since the composers of modern
hymn tunes seldom take into consideration the needs and wishes of
congregations. Church music has been delegated by us to paid singers,
and our church music becomes a thinly disguised concert, or, when
the really abominable vocal quartette supplies the music, a concert
outright.

What days those were when old William Dewey and Dicky, and Reuben and
Michael Mail played in the Mellstock church! What a fine personal
character such music had! How they loved to play--these simple rustics,
and how intimate was the relation between their music and the people
and the place! Read the early chapters of “Under the Greenwood Tree”
and listen to the ardent discussions between the players before they
go out on their Christmas rounds. “‘They should have stuck to strings
as we did, and keep out clar’nets, and done away with serpents. If
you’d thrive in musical religion, stick to strings, says I.’ ... ‘Yet
there’s worse things than serpents,’ said Mr. Penny. ‘Old things pass
away, ’tis true; but a serpent was a good old note; a deep rich note
was the serpent.’ ... ‘Robert Penny, you was in the right!’ broke in
the eldest Dewey. ‘They should ha’ stuck to strings.’ ‘Your brass-man
is a rafting dog--well and good; your reed-man is a dab at stirring
ye--well and good; your drum-man is a rare bowel-shaker--good again.
But I don’t care who hears me say it, nothing will spak to your heart
wi’ the sweetness o’ the man of strings.’”

In the preface to his book Hardy speaks of the advantage to the village
churches of that time of having these volunteer players and singers,
and how their displacement by the harmonium with its one player “has
tended to stultify the professed aims of the clergy, its direct result
being to curtail and extinguish the interest of parishioners in church
doings.” This holds good in our own village churches to-day, for we
consider music more a means of entertaining the church-goer than of
enlisting his interest in the services.

Women’s clubs provide a certain sort of musical life to small
communities. They foster the performance by members of rather
variegated programmes of pianoforte pieces and songs, with an
occasional concert by a paid performer from abroad, and they sometimes
make a study of a composer or a period of music. Many of them lose
sight of the only possible means of vitally influencing the musical
life of their own members and of the community at large.

In some of the communities of which I am writing there are choral
societies. In very few is there any well-sustained and continuous
choral organization giving concerts year after year supported by
the general public. The record of choral singing in America shows a
constant endeavor to attain grandiose results rather than to foster the
love of choral singing for itself. Singing societies are continually
wrecked by the expense of highly paid soloists, and are continually
striving for something beyond their reach.

This statement would not be complete were we to omit the instruments
which play themselves. The educational possibilities of these
instruments have not been realized, for they are used chiefly for
amusement. In spite of the extraordinary selections of music which one
finds in people’s houses, and in spite of the seemingly incorrigible
propensity to hear singing, as opposed to hearing music,--I mean the
exaggerated and grotesque singing of certain famous people who care
chiefly for sensation,--the graphophone, which has the practical
advantage of being portable and inexpensive,--it has transformed many
a lonely farmhouse,--and the mechanical piano-players have become
so popular that one can but conclude that there are multitudes of
people whose desire for music has never before been satisfied. Would
that this desire could be turned into proper channels; that these
instruments could be used systematically to build up taste and develop
understanding of great music. The larger number of people using them
have no means of knowing what to buy. If they could hear the best music
their allegiance would probably be secured. How many parents ever think
of the responsibility laid upon them of preserving or improving the
musical taste of their children by a careful supervision of the records
or rolls used with these instruments?

This completes the list of our own personal activities in music. And
we have to admit that the most discouraging item of all comes at the
end. For we make little music of our own, by our own firesides where
all good things should begin, and where we should find the community
in embryo. What a delightful element in family life is the gathering
together of young and old to join in singing! How few families
cultivate this custom! How few parents, whether they themselves care
for it or not, realize that their children would enjoy it and be helped
by it! Why should not such parents begin at once and be encouraged, or
even taught by their children until all can sing together heartily and
well? Is it not worth while preserving the musical sense of children,
so that when they reach your age they will not be helpless as you are?
Are you satisfied to have your child’s music merely bought and paid
for outside the home? How can you expect it to flourish under such
conditions? Let the children teach you, if need be. Copy them, learn
their songs by ear, and find out what music really is!

This somewhat meager showing of musical activity does not completely
represent our connection with the art, however, for nearly all but
the smallest communities spend considerable sums for concerts by paid
performers from abroad. But it is doubtless true that the majority of
the people in any small community hear very little real music at all
save at occasional concerts, and if a fine composition is performed
they seldom hear it again, so that it is clearly impossible for them to
understand it. In towns of from five to twenty thousand people all over
the country there is very little consciousness of what music really is.
Highly paid performers occasionally appear, and local pride asserts
itself to provide them with the adulation to which they are accustomed,
but real musical activity or musical feeling is confined to a few.

In large communities these conditions are duplicated and even
exaggerated. There nearly all the music is bought and paid for, and
very little is home-made. Nearly all choirs are composed of paid
singers. In cities, as in the country, choral societies are struggling
to find men who care enough about singing to attend rehearsals. There,
too, children go their rounds of “music” lessons. The only possible
way to estimate the state of music in our cities is to look at the
population as a whole. By counting up the number of fine concerts in
fashionable halls one arrives at no significant conclusions. Do we sing
at home, or when we are gathered together in friendly converse? Are
there small centers in cities where good music can be heard? Is there
any good music within reach of people of small means? The millionaire
regales his friends with the playing of his private organist (in
imitation of the old patron days of art, but generally without the love
and understanding of music which was the sole justification for the
proceeding), but does the dweller in the modest flat ever have a chance
to hear good music? These are questions we need to ask if we want to
estimate the state of music in our great cities. Is not all this grand
music, as I have said, merely a largess of our prosperity?

The most grandiose and disconnected form of our musical activity is the
opera. And when we consider the love of drama which finds expression
in nearly every small community in a dramatic club, we cannot but
deplore the almost complete detachment of opera from our natural
thoughts, feelings, and instincts. Of this detachment there is no doubt
whatever; the whole plan of American operatic productions is exotic,
aristocratic, and exclusive.

It is quite true that we are continually improving our musical status.
The effect of all our fine music may indeed be observed, but our
progress is undeniably slow, particularly when we remember with what
a liberal endowment we start. That endowment is very little less than
other peoples possess. Our children are musical, and there is no reason
why we should not be. Moreover, the strain of ideality which runs
through American life, however naïve it may be, would seem to make us
especially qualified to love and understand music.


III. WHAT WE MIGHT DO

I have indicated in a former chapter something of our needs as regards
the musical education of children. The problem before me now is how
to persuade American men and women into active coöperation in making
music. It is obvious that there is only one way of doing this, and that
is by singing. Only an infinitesimal number of people can play musical
instruments, but nearly everybody can sing. To play requires constant
practice. Singing in groups does not. In their right estate every man
and every woman should sing.

Now my urgent appeal for singing does not mean that every village,
town, or city should turn itself bodily into a huge singing society.
Some people will sing better than others and will enjoy it more, or
have more time for it. But there are constant opportunities for large
groups of people to sing--in church, on Memorial Day, at Christmas
time, at patriotic gatherings, or at dedications. Nothing is more
striking on such occasions than the total lack of any means of
spontaneously expressing that which lies in the consciousness of all,
and which cannot be delegated. What a splendid expression of devotion,
of commemoration, of dedication, of sacred love for those who died in
our Civil War would a thousand voices be, raised up as one in a great,
eternal, memorial hymn! What do we do? We hire a brass band to be
patriotic, devout, and commemorative for us. This inevitably tends to
dull our patriotism and our devotion. To live they must spring forth
in some sort of personal expression. In a village I know well, this
custom mars an otherwise deeply impressive observance of Memorial Day.
The “taps” at the soldiers’ graves in their silent resting places, the
sounds of minute guns booming, the long procession of townspeople, the
calling of the roll of the small company of soldiers who marched away
from that village green half a century ago, with only an occasional
feeble “Here” from the handful of survivors, the lowering of the flag
on the green with all heads uncovered, all eyes straining upward--these
make the ceremony fine and memorable. It needs to complete it only
some active expression on the part of every one such as singing would
provide.

“I know not at what point of their course, or for how long, but it was
from the column nearest him, which is to be the first line, that the
King heard, borne on the winds amid their field music, as they marched
there, the sound of Psalms--many-voiced melody of a church hymn, well
known to him; which had broken out, band accompanying, among those
otherwise silent men.” So relates Carlyle, in “Frederick the Great,”
of the march of Frederick and his army before the battle of Leuthen.
“With men like these, don’t you think I shall have victory this day?”
says Frederick. Is not such singing a wonderful thing? Those soldiers,
with a common dedication to duty, and a common disdain of death, send
up to some dimly sensed Heaven, from the very depths of their being, a
song. How otherwise could they express the thoughts and feelings that
must have been clamoring for utterance in their sturdy breasts? Their
bodies were marching to battle. What of their souls? Shall the very
spirit of them slumber on their way to death?

And we? We watch from afar; we are dumb; we look on this profoundly
moving ceremony, this simple pageant, and utter nothing of what we feel
and what we are. Why do we not sing? Is it not partly because of that
self-consciousness which hangs about us like a pall, and partly because
we were never made to like singing well enough to pursue it? The former
difficulty we could overcome easily enough if the right opportunity
continually offered itself. The latter, too, would disappear as
occasion arose when we could sing something worth singing. “The
Star-Spangled Banner” is a candle-snuffer on the flame of patriotic
feeling; never was there an air more unsuited to its purpose. Since we
have almost no indigenous national melodies, why should we not sing the
old songs, chorals, and hymns that have survived all sorts of national
changes and belong to every people? The tune for “America” is not an
American tune, neither is it English. It originated in Saxony. There
is no nationalism to stand in the way of such music, because it speaks
elementally and universally. There are scores of fine melodies which we
could well use.

The one place where singing might be fostered is in church. But where
the worshipers are asked to sing a hymn pitched too high for them, or
one that moves too quickly, or is full of unfamiliar and difficult
progressions in both melody and harmony, what other result can be
expected than poor singing and the gradual abandonment of all music to
a paid choir? The real purpose of the hymn tune has been lost. It was
intended to serve the needs of all the people, and to do this it must
be simple in both melody and harmony, and within the range Of every
man, woman, and child in the congregation. The sturdy old hymns and
chorals of our forefathers were so. Nothing is finer in church music
than good unison singing in which every one takes part. No skilled
choir singing can ever take its place.

Even the manner of singing hymns has changed. Many of them are raced
through at a pace which leaves one half the congregation behind, and
totally eclipses the other half! In many of the old hymn tunes there
is a pause at the end of each line, during which the members of the
congregation had a reasonable chance to take breath. Even these pauses
have often been eliminated, thus destroying the sense of the music
and giving a colder shoulder still to the musical and devotional
aspirations of the congregation. (If space permitted I should like to
dwell here on the genesis of some of these old tunes. They were deeply
embedded in the common life of our remote forefathers, and had no taint
of self-consciousness in them. Springing from the soil, they survived
all changes of dogma and custom. And they will survive. We shall come
back to them when we have survived our present attack of prettiness.)

The decline in hymn-singing is evident enough. Save in churches where
the liturgy restrains the ambitions of the choir, almost anything is
possible; and even under that restraint there is a constant tendency
toward display. What is the office of church music? Is it to astonish
or delight the congregation? Is it to supply them with a sacred concert
or fine singing? To take their minds off the situation in which they
find themselves? To ease the effect of a dull sermon, or obliterate
the effect of a good one? To serve as a bait to catch the unwary
non-church-goer, or as a means of retaining the waverer within the
fold? Or is it to induce devotion and religious feeling, to keep the
moment sacred and without intrusion? If the choir is to sing alone, why
should we accept from it display pieces, or arrangements from secular
music, or silly “sacred” songs overburdened with lush sentiment, or
anthems of a certain fluent type composed by anybody who can put a
lot of notes together in agreeable sequence? Why should we tolerate
the solo in operatic style, or contemptible solo quartette music,
suitable (and hardly that) for the end of a commercial “banquet”? Is
there, then, no reality behind church music? Is it merely any music
set to sacred words? He who has ever studied any art knows that this
cannot be true. The finest church music--of which Palestrina and Bach
are the greatest exponents--is based on something more than a casual
association with sacred words. In the Protestant churches of our cities
the music is very largely derived from modern English sources, and I
count this an obstacle to our progress. Beginning with the last half of
the nineteenth century, English church music has been dominated by a
school of composers whose music is charming, or pretty, or melodious,
or what-you-will, but is not either profound or devout. Nearly all our
organists are, musically, of English descent, but they treat their
forefathers with but scant respect. There is no difficulty whatever in
procuring good music for choirs. There is a supply suitable for solo
singing or chorus, for small choir or large, to be purchased at any
music shop. There are a dozen fine composers whose music is never heard
in most American churches; composers such as Palestrina, Vittoria, and
others of the great period of church music; or Bach, or Gibbons, Byrd,
and Purcell, whose music is in the true idiom, an idiom now almost
entirely lost; or John Goss, Samuel Wesley, and Thomas Attwood in the
early part of the nineteenth century, before the decadence had fairly
begun. The earliest of this music is written for voices unaccompanied,
and is therefore too difficult for any but a highly trained choir; but
there are plenty of simple anthems with organ accompaniment by the
early English composers named above, and there are a certain number of
Bach’s motets suitable for choirs of moderate ability.

Let me mention “O Thou, the central orb,” by Gibbons, as an example
of a fine anthem in the old style, and “Oh, Saviour of the World,” by
Goss, as an example of the simpler and later type. These are beautiful,
simple, and dignified anthems suitable for city or country choir. If
the city choirmaster will give over for a time trying to provide the
congregation with brilliant music which is chiefly notable for its
extravagance of technique and its striking effects, his listeners will,
perhaps, be able to revert to that state of quiet devotion which the
rest of the service has induced. Many choir directors would doubtless
like to use simpler and more devotional music, but are hindered from
doing so because they feel upon them the weight of the opinion and
taste of the congregation, and perhaps of the preacher. Everybody,
regardless of his qualifications for doing so, feels at liberty to
criticize the music he hears in church.

Social and musical clubs for women exist in great numbers all over
the United States. They are often useful in practical ways, but their
contact with artistic matters is, on the contrary, often ineffectual.
They offer their members continual sips at different springs, but no
deep draught at one. The average member of a women’s club, if she is to
be helped in anything, must be helped from the position in which she
then is; and this is particularly true of music. But she is torn out
of her natural environment and asked to listen to a recital of, say,
modern French music, not one note of which answers to her intelligence
or her feelings. The passion for the last thing in music without any
knowledge of the first is fatal to any one. And when one considers the
enormous membership in clubs for women in this country, one can but
wish that more effort were made to help the individual to progress
simply and naturally step by step. It is not to be expected that the
average woman, whose time is very likely occupied with domestic cares,
should make an extended study of music; but it is possible to give her
a chance to hear a few simple, good compositions, and to hear them
several times during a season, so that she may learn to understand
them. The more experienced and more advanced members of women’s clubs
are apt to dominate in these matters and to forget the needs of the
others, and there is certain to be a few rare souls who dwell entirely
in the rarefied atmosphere of the very latest music, and who look down
on the common ignorance of the mass. Some women’s clubs purvey only the
performance of great players or singers, and pride themselves on their
lists of celebrities, all too forgetful of those delicately adjusted
scales which demand equal weight _in kind_. If a women’s club in a
small town (or in a large one, for that matter) should abjure for the
moment pianoforte and vocal recitals of the latest music, and should
proceed to devote a little time to singing, in unison, some fine old
songs in which every one could take part, a fair start would be made.
I am not attempting to belittle the musical capabilities of these
clubs, nor am I decrying expert performances; I am merely speaking for
the average woman who has had little opportunity for musical education
or musical experience, and who is usually left far behind as club
programmes run, yet who is capable of understanding music if it be
brought to her in the proper manner. Ask her to sing with you and she
is brought into the fold instead of straying blindly outside. Every
meeting of a women’s club (why qualify?--of any club, save, perhaps, a
burglar’s, where silence would be desirable) should begin with a hearty
song. Step by step--not a violent leap to a dizzy height; we cannot
become musical by the force of our aspiration even though it be quite
sincere; nature unrelentingly exacts of us that same slow growth which
she herself makes. There is no to-morrow.

If all the people in a community expressed themselves at appropriate
times and seasons by singing, it would naturally follow that a goodly
number of them would form themselves into a singing society. This
society would satisfy the desire of the community to hear such
music as can be performed only after considerable practice. I cannot
emphasize too strongly the connection between the community and the
singing society. The latter should be the answer to the community’s
desire, and not be a spectacle--if I may mix my metaphors to that
extent.


IV. AN EXPERIMENT

I live in a town of some six thousand inhabitants which about answers
to the description given near the beginning of this article. There was
a singing society in the place about thirty years ago, but since then
there has been little choral singing. Two years ago I asked some thirty
people to come together to practice choral singing. I then stated that
I should like to train them if they would agree to two conditions:
first, that we should sing none but the very best music, and second,
that our concerts should be free to the townspeople. These conditions
were at once agreed to and we started rehearsing. We found it possible
to get the use of the largest church containing a good organ, and we
found four people who played the violin and two the violoncello. Our
little orchestra finally grew until we had some eight or ten string
players. We borrowed kettledrums and one of our enthusiasts learned to
play them.

We have given three concerts, at each of which the church was more
than filled--it seats about six hundred people. Our programmes have
contained Brahms’s “Schicksalslied” (Song of Fate) and parts of his
“Requiem,” Bach’s motet, “I Wrestle and Pray,” arias from the “St.
Matthew Passion,” and similar compositions. Our soloists have been
members of our chorus, with little previous experience of such music
as we have been singing, but with a profound sensibility to it brought
about by continued practice of it. The townspeople who have come to
hear our music have given certain evidence of a fact which I have for
many years known to be true, namely, that when people have a chance
to know thoroughly a great composition it invariably secures their
complete allegiance. We have therefore repeated our performance of
these various works, sometimes singing one piece twice in the same
concert. We have given, for example, the “Schicksalslied” three times
in two years, and both singers and audience are completely won over to
it.

Our singing society is supported by the payment of fifty cents each
by any individual who cares to subscribe. We give two open concerts a
year, at which six hundred people hear the finest choral music at a
total annual expense of about seventy-five dollars. Every one connected
with the project gives his or her services free. Our concerts take
place on Sunday afternoons. At the last one I tried an interesting
experiment. Bach’s motet, “I Wrestle and Pray,” is based, as is common
in his choral pieces, on a chorale which is sung by the sopranos in
unison, with florid counterpoints in the other parts. At the end the
chorale is given in its original form, so that the congregation may
join in the singing of it. It was a simple matter for us to get six
hundred copies of this chorale reproduced by mimeograph, and these were
distributed in the pews. The result was almost electrifying to one who
had heard the feeble church singing of feebler hymns in our churches.
The second time the motet was sung--we performed it at the beginning
and at the end of this concert--nearly every one joined in and the
echoes rolled as they had never rolled before in that church. Why?
These very same people send up feeble, timid, disorganized, slightly
out-of-tune sounds every Sunday morning in their various churches. Has
a miracle happened that they are lustily singing together? Not at all.
They have merely been offered an opportunity to do what they are all
quite capable of doing, namely, singing a hymn suited to them. This
chorale has a range of but five tones--from _f_ to _c_; it is largely
diatonic, proceeding step by step of the scale, and it is noble and
inspiring. How often had such an opportunity been presented to them
before? Why not?

The members of our chorus are such people as one would find in most
American towns of the same size. Perhaps we are more than usually
fortunate in our solo singers and our orchestra. I believe the chief
reason why a project like this might be difficult in many places is
because it might not be possible to find a leader who cared more for
Bach and Brahms than for lesser composers. The technical problem is not
extreme, but the leader must have unbounded belief in the best music
and tolerate nothing less. The moment this latter condition lapses,
choral singing will lapse--as it would deserve to do.

There are many small communities where choral concerts on a large scale
are occasionally given. Great effort and great expense are not spared.
Several hundred voices, a hired orchestra, and hired soloists make the
event notable. But the music performed is of such a character that no
one wants to hear it again; neither the singers who practice it nor the
audience who listen to it are moved or uplifted. There have even been
systematic efforts in some middle western states to establish community
singing. The effect of such efforts depends there, as here, on the kind
of music which people are asked to sing, for this is the heart of the
whole matter. No advance in music, or in anything else, can be expected
without constant striving for the very best. And it is quite within
bounds to say that most of these efforts are nullified by lack of a
really high standard. Finally, let me say that a concert of good music
by a local choral society is, to the people of any community, immensely
more valuable than a paid musical demonstration by performers from
abroad which costs five times as much money.


V. MUSIC AS A SOCIAL FORCE

Leaving this actual experience and its effects on the community, let us
ask ourselves what this singing means to the individuals who do it. In
the first place, it makes articulate something within them which never
finds expression in words or acts. In the second place, it permits
them to create beauty instead of standing outside it. Or, to speak
still more definitely, it not only gives them an intimate familiarity
with some great compositions, but it accustoms them to the technique
by means of which music expresses itself. They learn to make melodic
lines, to add a tone which changes the whole character of a chord; they
learn how themes are disposed in relation to one another; they come
into intimate contact with the actual materials of the art by handling
them. This, we do not need to say, is the key to the knowledge and
understanding of anything. You cannot understand life, or love, or
hate, or objects, or ideas, until you have dealt in them yourself.
Singing has the profound psychological advantage of giving active issue
to that love of beauty which is usually entirely passive.

The artist has two functions: he draws, or paints, or models; he uses
language or sounds. This comprises his technique. But he also possesses
imaginative perception. Now, nothing is more certain than that our
understanding of what he does must be in kind. We learn to understand
his technique by actual experience of it. So, also, we learn to enter
into the higher qualities of his art by the exercise of the same
faculties which he uses. Our feelings, our minds, and our imaginations
must take a reflection from him as in a mirror. If the glass is blurred
or the angle of reflection distorted we cannot see the image in its
perfection. The light comes from we know not where.

Let any reader of these words ask himself if the statement they
contain of the qualities of music and of our relation to it could not
with equal force be applied to his own business or occupation. Is
not his understanding of that business or occupation based on these
two essentials: first, familiarity with its methods and materials,
and, second, some conception of the real meaning, significance, and
possibility that lie behind its outward appearance and manifestation?

I have not laid sufficient stress on the advantage to men of singing.
Not only does it enable them to become self-expressive, but it gives
them the most wholesome of diversions, it equalizes them, it creates a
sort of brotherhood, it takes their minds off per cents, and gives them
a new and different insight. This is, of course, not accomplished by
the kind of music men now sing, which is chiefly associated with sports
and conviviality. So long as music is only outside us, so long as we
educate our children without bringing them into actual contact with its
materials, giving them little real training in the development of the
senses, just so long will it remain a mystery, just so long will its
office be misunderstood. What a perplexity it is now to many of us! How
it does thrust us away! We have got beyond being ashamed to love it,
but we love it from afar.

From a sociological point of view this discussion has thus far been
somewhat limited. Now, the possibilities in music to weld together
socially disorganized communities have never been fully realized
in America. Were we to set about using it directly to that end,
we should find out how valuable it is in breaking down artificial
barriers. By choral singing, people in any one locality can be brought
into a certain sympathy with each other. Groups who attend the same
church, the fathers and mothers of children whom the settlements
reach--wherever there is a “neighborhood” there is a chance for
singing. It needs only a person who believes in it, and who will
rigidly select only the best music. And where neighborhood groups have
been singing the same fine music, any great gathering of people would
find everybody ready to take part in choral singing. This would make
community music a reality, and would doubtless so foster the love of
the art as eventually to affect the whole musical situation. Any one
who has ever had personal experience of bringing fine music to those
who cannot afford to attend concerts knows that such people are as
keen for the best as are those who can afford it. There is no one so
quick to appreciate the best as the person who lives apart from all
those social usages of ours which constitute our silk-spun cocoons.
There we lie snugly ensconced, protected from sharp winds, completely
enshrouded, while these other folk are battling with life itself.
We may be satisfied with a gleam or two through the mesh; they are
not. They meet reality on every hand and know it when they see it. No
make-believe can deceive them.

And when I say this I mean that the experiment has been tried over and
over again. In what are called “the slums” of the greatest American and
English cities I have seen hundreds and even thousands of poor people
listening to the music of Beethoven, and to a few simple words about
it in rapt and tense silence, and have heard them break out into such
unrestrained applause as comes only from those who are really hungry
for good music. Put a good orchestra into any one of these places and
you will find the best kind of an audience. Such people have no taint
of hyper-criticism, no desire to talk wisely about the latest composer.
They have not constructed for themselves a nice little æsthetic formula
which will fit everything--a sort of protective coloring; their minds
are not “made up.”

Let us not misunderstand this situation. I am not writing about
painting or sculpture, for I know that these arts involve certain
perceptive and selective qualities of the mind which require long
training. I am writing about music, which appeals to a sense
differentiated and trained long before the sense for color-vibration or
for beauty of form was developed, a sense which we possess in a highly
developed state in very childhood.

Imagine a small opera house in the lower East Side of New York or in
the North End or South End of Boston, which the people there might
frequent at sums within their means; imagine a small Western city
with such an opera house; and compare the probable results with
those now attained by our gorgeous and needlessly expensive operatic
performances which, whether at home or abroad, leave little behind
them but a financial vacuum, and a dim idea that somehow opera means
famous “stars” singing in a highly exaggerated manner in a strange
language, in stranger dramas, where motives and purposes are stranger
still. Concerts and operatic performances such as I have advocated
would supplement and complete our own musical activities. These paid
artists would be playing and singing to us in a language we ourselves
had learned by using it. Music would be domestic; we should understand
it better and love it more.

I am familiar with the old argument that concerts and operas so
conducted would not pay. To this I reply that it is probably true. Does
settlement work pay? Does a library pay? Does any altruistic endeavor
anywhere pay? No; nothing of this sort ever shows a money balance
on the right side of the ledger. But we do not keep that column in
figures. It foots up in joy, not in dollars. The best kind of social
“uplift” would be something that made people happier. The real uplift
is of the soul, not of the body. Let a rift of beauty pierce the dull
scene. Let us have a taste of heaven now; and let it be not yours or
mine, but theirs. In music everybody makes his own heaven at the time.

But it is not money that is lacking. Hundreds of thousands are annually
spent to make up the deficits of our symphony orchestras. Millions are
spent for the physical well-being of our poorer people. Beauty for the
well-to-do, who are, like as not, too well-to-do to care much for it;
materialistic benefits for the poor and unfortunate, who are fairly
starving for something bright and joyous. What would it not mean to
these latter were they able to go once a week to a hall in their own
part of the city, to hear a fine concert at a fee well within their
means, and to know that there would be no chairman there to tell them
“what a great privilege,” etc., but that they would be let alone to
enjoy themselves in their own way. These, after all, make up the great
body of our city populations; from these humble homes come the future
American citizens; in some ways they are superior to us, for they
survive a much harder battle, and preserve their self-respect in face
of enormous difficulties. Why should we dole out to them what _we_
think they need? Why not offer them something that puts us all on the
same level?

The inevitable conclusion to be drawn from an investigation of our
musical situation is that we need only opportunities of expressing
ourselves. Every village contains a potential singing society, every
church contains a potential choir, every family in which there are
children might sing simple songs together. There is a singing club
hidden away in every neighborhood. Every city might have, on occasion,
thousands of people singing fine songs and hymns. What is the present
need? Leaders: educated musicians who have learned the technique
of their art and have, at the same time, learned to understand and
appreciate the greatest music, and who prefer it to any other. Our
institutions for training musicians are sending out a continual stream
of graduates, many of whom begin their labors in small towns and
cities. Nearly every community has at least one man who has sufficient
technical knowledge of music to direct groups of singers, large and
small. What kind of music does he, in his heart, prefer? The answer is
to be read in programmes here and there, in the record of unsuccessful
singing societies, in the public performances of “show pieces.” Should
not our institutions pay more attention to forming the taste of their
students? Is it really necessary to teach them technique through bad
examples of the art of music? Can they safely spend several years
dealing with distinctly inferior music for the sake of a facile
technique? Is rhetoric or oratory superior to literature? There is
no such thing as teaching violin or piano-playing _and_ teaching
music. If the violin or piano teaching deals with poor music which the
pupil practices several hours a day, no lessons in musical history,
theory, form, or æsthetics can counteract the effect of that constant
association. We cannot advance without leaders. We look to the training
schools for them. And these schools cannot expect to supply them to us
unless they so conduct their teaching as to develop in students a love
and understanding of the best.

This article, then, expresses my conviction that the average American
man or woman is potentially musical. I believe the world of music to
be a true democracy. I am convinced that our chief need is to make
music ourselves. I believe that under right conditions we should enjoy
doing so; I think all art is closely related to the sum of human
consciousness. And just as I see great music based on what we are and
what we feel, so I see the expert performance of music as being merely
our own performance magnified and beautified by extreme skill. I see,
in short, a necessary and natural connection between ourselves and
both composer and performer. I believe that all the great pictures and
sculpture and music lay first in the general consciousness and then
became articulate in one man. I believe no statesman, no philosopher,
no, not even a Christ, to be conceivable save as he lies first in men’s
hearts. What they are _in posse_ he is _in esse_. That we all are more
musical than we are thought to be; that we are more musical than we get
the chance to be--of this there is no doubt whatever.




CHAPTER V

THE OPERA


I. WHAT IS OPERA?

The form of drama with music which we loosely call “opera” is such
a curious mixture of many elements--some of them closely related,
others nearly irreconcilable--that it is almost impossible to arrive
at any definite idea of its artistic value. A great picture or piece
of sculpture, a great book or a great symphony represents a perfectly
clear evolution of a well-defined art. You do not question the artistic
validity of “Pendennis” or of a portrait by Romney; they have their
roots in the earlier works of great writers and painters and they tend
toward those which follow. The arts they represent grew by a slow
process of evolution, absorbing everything that was useful to them and
rejecting everything useless, until they finally became consistent and
self-contained. The development of opera, on the other hand, has been
a continual compromise--with the whims of princes, with the even more
wayward whims of singers, and with social conventions.

Its increasing costliness (due sometimes to the composer’s
grandiloquence and sometimes to the demands of the public) has
necessitated producing it in huge opera houses entirely unsuited to
it; and, being a mixed art, it has been subject to two different
influences which have not by any means always been in agreement. Its
life-line has been crossed over and over again by daring innovators
who, forgetting the past, have sought to force it away from nature and
to make it an expression of excessive individualism. Methods which
would find oblivion quickly enough in any pure form of art have been
carried out in opera, and have been supported by an uncritical public
pleased by a gorgeous spectacle or entertained by fine singing. All
the other art-forms progress step by step; opera leaps first forward,
then backward; it becomes too reasonable, only to become immediately
afterward entirely unreasonable; it passes from objectivity to
subjectivity and back again, or employs both at the same time; it turns
a man into a woman, or a woman into a man; it thinks nothing of being
presented in two languages at once; it turns colloquial Bret Harte into
Italian without the slightest realization of having become, in the
process, essentially comic: in short, there seems no limit to the havoc
it can play with geography, science, language, costume, drama, music,
and human nature itself.

Any attempt, therefore, to deal here with the development of opera as
a whole would be an impossible undertaking. We should become at once
involved in a glossary of singers (now only names, then in effect
constituting the opera itself), an unsnarling of impossible plots, an
excursion into religion, into the ballet, into mythology, demonology,
pseudo-philosophy, mysticism, and Heaven knows what else. We should see
our first flock of canary birds,--released simply to make us gape,--and
we should hear a forest bird tell the hero (through the medium of a
singer off the stage) the way to a sleeping beauty; we should hear the
hero and the villain sing a delightful duet and then see them turn away
in different directions to seek and murder each other; we should find
the Pyramids and the Latin Quarter expressible in the same terms; our
heroines would include the mysterious and demoniac scoffer, Kundry,
the woman who doubts and questions, the woman who should have but did
not, and the woman who goes mad and turns the flute-player in the
orchestra to madness with her; we should see men and women, attired
in inappropriate and even unintelligible costumes, drink out of empty
cups, and a hero mortally wound a papier-mâché dragon; we should have
to shut our eyes in order to hear, or stop our ears in order to see; if
we cared for music, we should have to wait ten minutes for a domestic
quarrel in recitative to finish; if we cared for drama, we should have
to wait the same length of time while a prima donna tossed off birdling
trills and chirpings. We should, in short, find ourselves dealing with
a mixed art of quite extraordinary latitude in style, form, dramatic
purpose, and musical texture.

It will be sufficient for our purposes, therefore, to state that both
sacred and secular plays with music have existed from the earliest
times, and that their development has tended toward the form as we
now know it. The introduction of songs into plays was, in itself, so
agreeable and interesting that their use continually increased until
some vague operatic form was reached in which music predominated.

But there are two great revolutionary epochs to which proper attention
must be paid if we are to understand opera at all. The first of these
is the so-called “Florentine Revolution” in the years 1595 to 1600, and
the second is the Wagnerian reform in the middle of the last century.


II. OPERA IN THE OLD STYLE

The “Florentine Revolution” was an attempt to create an entirely new
type of opera in which all tradition was thrown to the winds. To
“Eurydice,” the best known of these Florentine operas, its composer,
Peri, wrote a preface, from which we quote the following: “Therefore,
abandoning every style of vocal writing known hitherto, I gave myself
up wholly to contriving the sort of imitation (of speech) demanded
by this poem.” (Is this, indeed, Peri speaking? Or is it Gluck, or
Wagner, or Debussy?) In any case, the abandonment, in any form of
human expression, of every style known hitherto is a fatal abandonment,
for no art, or science, or literature can throw away its past and
live. The Florentine Revolution was not revolution, but riot, for it
undertook to tear down what generations had been slowly building up,
and to substitute in its place something not only untried but (at
that time) impossible. It was an attempt to found a new art _entirely
detached_ from an old one. Beethoven without Haydn and Mozart, Meredith
without Fielding, the Gothic without the Classical, a Renaissance
without a birth, daylight without sunrise. It was an entirely
illogical proceeding from first to last, but opera came forth from it
because opera can subsist--it has, and does--without logic or even
reasonableness.

There had been composed before the year 1600 the most beautiful sacred
music the world possesses--that which culminated in the works of
Palestrina. A style or method of expression had been perfected, and
this style or method was gradually and naturally being applied to
secular and even to dramatic forms. There were at that time, also,
songs of the people which had been often used in plays with music, and
which might have supplied a basis for opera. But the creators of the
new opera would have none of these. They had a theory (fatal possession
for any artist): they wanted to revive the Greek drama, and they
believed that, in opera, music should be subservient to the text. It
was Peri and his associates who first saw this will-o’-the-wisp, which
has since become completely embodied into a fully equipped and valiant
bugaboo to frighten and subdue those who love music for music’s sake.
All that one needs to say on this point is that there is no great opera
in existence, save alone “Pelléas et Mélisande” by Debussy, in which
the music is not supreme over the text (and Debussy’s opera is unique
in its treatment and leads nowhere--or, if anywhere, away from opera).
Peri’s reforms were artistically unreasonable, but the composers who
followed him gradually evolved what is called the aria or operatic song
and did eventually make a more or less coherent operatic form, although
a long time passed before opera unified in itself the various elements
necessary to artistic completeness.

It was only a short time, however, before opera attained the widest
favor all over Europe, a favor which it has enjoyed from that day to
this. The reasons for this never-waning popularity are found first in
the natural preference on the part of the public for the human voice
over any instrument. For whatever facility of technique or felicity of
expression musical instruments may have, they lack the intimate human
quality of the singing voice. The voice comes to the listener in terms
of himself, whereas an instrument may be strange and unsympathetic and
awaken no response. So complete is this sympathy between the singer
and listener that almost any singer with a fine voice (she is, very
likely, called a “human nightingale”) is sure to attract an audience,
no matter what she sings or how little musical intelligence she shows.
(It is this sympathy, too, which inflicts on us the drawing-room song,
the last word in utter vacuity.) Coupled with this is the delight the
public takes in extraordinary vocal feats of agility. The singer vies
with a flute in the orchestra, or sings two or three notes higher than
any other singer has ever sung, and the public crowds to hear her. But
it is useless to dwell on this: the disease is incurable; there will
always be, I fear, an unthinking public ready for any vocal gymnast who
sings higher or faster than anybody else, or who can toss off trills
and runs with a smiling face and a pretty costume, and in entirely
unintelligible words. And, second, when this singing, which the public
dearly loves, is coupled with the perennial fascination of the drama,
the appeal is irresistible.

I do not need to dwell here on the quality in the drama which has
made it popular from the remotest time until now. One can say this,
however: that to people who are incapable of re-creating a world of
beauty in their own minds--although nature surrounds them with it, and
imaginative literature is in every library--the stage is a perpetual
delight. There they behold impossible romances, incredible virtues and
vices, heroes and heroines foully persecuted but inevitably triumphant,
impossible scenes in improbable countries, everything left out that is
tiresome and habitual and necessitous, no blare of daylight but only
golden sunrise and flaming sunset: the impossible realized at last.
These qualities are in all drama to a greater or less extent, for they
embody the essence of what the drama is. Æschylus and Shakespeare
divest life of its prose as completely as does a raging melodrama, for
a play must move from one dramatic and salient point to another; and
while those great dramatists imply the whole of life,--whereas the
ordinary play implies nothing,--they do not and cannot present it in
its actual and complete continuity.

Now the drama is subject more or less to public opinion and to public
taste, because in the drama we understand what we are hearing. On the
other hand the opera, considered as drama, is almost free from any
such responsibility, because it is sung in a foreign language; or if,
by chance, in our own tongue, the size of the opera house and the
disinclination of singers to pay any attention to their diction renders
the text unintelligible. So the libretto of the opera escapes scrutiny.
“What is too silly to be said is sung,” says Voltaire.

Let us note also that when an art becomes detached from its own
past, when it is not based on natural human life, and does not obey
those general laws to which all art is subject, it is sure to evolve
conventions of one sort or another and to become artificial. This is
to be observed in what is called the “rococo” style of architecture,
as well as in the terrible objects perpetrated by the “futurists” and
“cubists” (anything that is of the future must also be of the past,
no matter whether it is a picture, or a tree, or an idea). Opera was
soon in the grip of these conventions from which, with a few notable
exceptions, it has never escaped. Even the common conventions of the
drama, which we accept readily enough, are in opera stretched to the
breaking point. For many generations operas were planned according
to a set, inflexible scheme of acts; a woman took a man’s part (as
in Gounod’s “Faust”); characters were stereotyped; the position of
the chief _aria_ (solo) for the prima donna was exactly determined
so as to give to her entrance all possible impressiveness; the set
musical pieces (solos, duets, choruses, and so forth) were arranged
artificially and not to satisfy any dramatic necessity. There is some
justness in Wagner’s saying that the old conventional opera was “a
concert in costume.”

An example of this conventionality and lack of dramatic unity may be
found in the famous quartette scene in Verdi’s “Rigoletto,” an opera
which is typical of the Italian style (in which, in Meredith’s phrase,
“there is much dallying with beauty in the thick of sweet anguish”).
In this scene there are two persons in hiding to watch two others. The
concealment is the hinge upon which, for the moment, the story swings.
But the exigencies of the music are such that, before the piece has
progressed very far, all four are singing at the top of their lungs and
with no pretext of concealment--in a charming piece of music, indeed,
but quite divested of dramatic truth and unity. And then, naturally
enough, the thin veneer of drama having been pierced, they answer your
applause by joining hands and bowing, after which the two conceal
themselves again, the music strikes up as before, and the whole scene
is repeated.

But one of the most artificial elements in the old operas was the
ballet. Its part in the opera scheme was purely to be a spectacle, and
great sums were lavishly spent to make it as gorgeous as possible. It
had usually nothing whatever to do with the story, but was useful
in drawing an audience of pleasure-lovers who did not take opera
seriously. Once upon a time, in London, by an extraordinary unlucky
stroke of fate, Carlyle was persuaded to go to hear an opera containing
a ballet; whereupon he fulminated as follows: “The very ballet girls,
with their muslin saucers round them, were perhaps little short of
miraculous; whirling and spinning there in strange mad vortexes, and
then suddenly fixing themselves motionless, each upon her left or right
great toe, with the other leg stretched out at an angle of ninety
degrees--as if you had suddenly pricked into the floor, by one of their
points, a pair, or rather a multitudinous cohort, of mad restlessly
jumping and clipping scissors, and so bidden them rest, with open
blades, and stand still in the Devil’s name!”

One remembers, also, “War and Peace,” with its scene at the opera--and
Tolstoï’s reference to the chief male dancer as getting “sixty thousand
francs a year for cutting capers.” So, looking over the older operas
which still hold their place in the repertoire, we think of them as
rather absurd, and comfort ourselves with the reflection that to-day
opera has outgrown its youthful follies and has become a work of art.


III. WAGNER AND AFTER

Then came the second great operatic reform,--that of Wagner,--which
was supposed to free us from the old absurdities and make of opera a
reasonable and congruous thing. This, Wagner’s operas, at the outset,
bade fair to be. In “Der Fliegende Holländer,” “Tannhäuser,” and
“Lohengrin” there is a reasonable correspondence between the action
and the music; we can listen and look without too great disruption
of our faculties. Wagner’s librettos are, with one exception,
based on mythological stories or ideas. His personages are eternal
types--Lohengrin of purity and heroism, Wotan of power by fiat,
Brunhilde (greatest of them all) of heroic and noble womanhood. He
adopted the old device by means of which certain salient qualities in
his characters--such as Siegfried’s youth and fearlessness, Wotan’s
majesty, and so forth--were defined by short phrases of music called
_leit-motifs_; he made his orchestra eloquent of the movement of
his drama, instead of employing it as a “huge guitar”; he eliminated
the set musical piece, which was bound to delay the action; he kept
his music always moving onward by avoiding the so-called “authentic
cadence,” which in all the older music perpetually cries a halt.

But by all these means Wagner imposed on his listener a constant strain
of attention: _leit-motifs_ recurring, developing, and disintegrating,
every note significant, a huge and eloquent orchestra, a voice singing
phrases which are not parts of a complete melody then and there being
evolved,--as in an opera by Verdi,--but which are related to something
first heard perhaps half an hour before in a preceding act (or a week
before in another drama): we have all this to strain every possibility
of our appreciative faculty, and _at the same time_ he asks us to watch
an actual combat between a hero and a dragon, or to observe another
between two heroes half in the clouds with a God resplendent stretching
out a holy spear to end the duel as he wills it, while a Valkyrie
hovers above on her flying steed. Or he sets his drama under water,
with Undines swimming about and a gnome clambering the slippery rocks
to filch a jewel in exchange for his soul. Yes, even this, and more;
for he asks us to witness the end of the world--the waters rising,
the very heavens aflame--when our heart is so torn by the stupendous
_inner_ tragedy of Brunhilde’s immolation that the end of the world
seems utterly and completely irrevelant and impertinent.

After all, we are human. We cannot be men and women and, at the same
time, children. We should like to crouch down in our seat in the opera
house and forget everything save the noble, splendid, and beautiful
music, seeing only just so much action as would accord with our state
of inner exaltation. An opera must be objective or subjective; it
cannot be both at the same time. The perfection of “Don Giovanni” is
due to the exact equality between the amount and intensity of the
action and of the musical expression--or, in other words, to the
complete union of matter and manner, of form and style. The “Ring”
cycle is objective and subjective; it is the extreme of stage mechanism
(and more), and, at the same time, everything that is imaginatively
profound and moving. It is impossible to avoid the conclusion that
Wagner in those great music-dramas lost sight of the balance between
means and ends, and the proportion between action and thought. His
own theories, and the magnitude of his subject, led him to forget the
natural limitations which are imposed upon a work of art by the very
nature of those beings for whom it was created. The “Ring” dramas
should be both _acted_ and _witnessed_ by gods and goddesses for whom
time and space do not exist, and who are not limited by a precarious
nervous system. No one can be insensitive to the great beauty of
certain portions of these gigantic music-dramas,--every one recognizes
Wagner’s genius as it shows itself, for example, in either of the
great scenes between Siegfried and Brunhilde,--but the intricate and
well-nigh impossible stage mechanism and the excursions into the
written drama constitute serious defects. (For the scene between Wotan
and Fricka in “Das Rheingold” and similar passages in the succeeding
dramas are essentially scenes to be read rather than acted.)

One would suppose that Wagner had made impossible any repetition of
the old operatic incongruities. Quite the contrary is the case. One of
the latest Italian operas is, if anything, more absurd than any of its
predecessors. What could be more grotesque than an opera whose scene
is in a mining camp in the West, whose characters include a gambler, a
sheriff, a woman of the camp, and so forth, whose language is perforce
very much in the vernacular, whose plot hinges on a game of cards,--an
“Outcast-of-Poker-Flat” opera,--and this translated, for the benefit
of the composer, into Italian and produced in that language? “I’m dead
gone on you, Minnie,” says Rance; “_Ti voglio bene, Minnie_,” sings his
Italian counterpart.

“Rigoletto” does entrance us by the beauty and the sincerity of its
melodies; it is what it pretends to be; it deals with emotions which we
can share because they derive ultimately from great human issues. The
Count, Magdalina, Rigoletto, and Gilda are all types; we know them well
in literature--in poetry, novel, and drama; they are valid. We accept
the strained convention of the scene as being inevitable at that point
in the development of the opera. But after Wagner’s reforms, and the
influence they exerted on Verdi himself, the greatest of the Italians,
it would seem incredible that any composer could lapse into a “Girl of
the Golden West.”

Nearly all Puccini’s operas are a reversion to type. The old-fashioned
lurid melodrama appears again, blood-red as usual; as in “La Tosca,”
which leaves almost nothing to the imagination--one specially wishes
that it did in certain scenes. “Local color,” so-called, appears again
in all its arid deception--as in the Japanese effects in the music of
“Madame Butterfly”; again we hear the specious melody pretending to be
real, with its octaves in the orchestra to give it a sham intensity. It
is the old operatic world all over again. When we compare any tragic
scene in Puccini’s operas with the last act of Verdi’s “Otello,” we
realize the vast difference between the two. It is true that Puccini
gives us beautiful lyric moments--as when Mimi, in “La Bohème,” tells
Rudolph who she is; it is true, also, that we ought not to cavil
because Puccini is not as great a composer as Verdi. Our comparison is
not for the purpose of decrying one at the expense of the other, but
to point out that the greater opera is not called for by the public and
the lesser is; that we get “La Bohème,” “Madame Butterfly,” and “La
Tosca” twenty times to “Otello’s” once, and that we thereby lose all
sense of operatic values.

The most trumpeted operatic composer of to-day is the worst of operatic
sinners. Nothing could be more debasing to music and to drama than the
method Strauss employs in “Electra.” In its original form “Electra”
is a play of profound significance, whose art, philosophy, and ethics
are a natural expression of Greek life and thought. It contains ideas
and it presents actions which, while totally alien to us, we accept as
belonging to that life and thought. In the original, or in any good
translation, its simplicity and its elemental grandeur are calculated
to move us deeply, for we achieve a historical perspective and see
the meaning and significance of the catastrophe which it presents.
This great story our modern composer proceeds to treat pathologically.
Nothing is sacred to him. He invests every passion, every fearful deed
with a personal and immediate significance which entirely destroys its
artistic and its historical sense. The real “Electra” is an impersonal,
typical, national, and religious drama; Hofmannsthal and Strauss have
made it into a seething caldron of riotous, unbridled passion.

The lead given by Strauss in “Salome,” “Electra,” and, in different
form or type, in “Der Rosenkavallier” has been quickly followed. “The
Jewels of the Madonna” is an “Electra” of the boulevard, in which the
worst sort of passion and the worst sort of sacrilege are flaunted
openly in the name of drama. It belongs in the “Grand Guignol.” Let
any reasonable person read the librettos of current operas and form
an opinion, not of their morals,--for there is only one opinion about
that,--but of their claims on the attention of any serious-minded
person.

I refer to the moral status of these stories only because many of them
stress the abnormal and lack a sense of proportion. Art seeks the truth
wherever it be, but the truth is the whole truth and not a segment of
it. A novel may represent almost any phase of life, but it must keep
a sense of proportion. Dostoïevsky pushes the abnormal to the extreme
limit, but on the other hand he is “a brother to his villains” and
he gives us plenty of redeeming types. The hero in “The Idiot” is a
predominating and _overbalancing_ character. The object of all great
literature is to present the truth in terms of beauty. “Tess of the
D’Urbervilles” is as moral as “Emma.” But the further one gets from
a deliberate form of artistic expression like the novel, the less
latitude one has in this respect. An episode in a novel of Dostoïevsky
would be an impossible subject for a picture. So opera, which focuses
itself for us in the stage frame and within a limited time, must
somehow preserve for itself this truthfulness and fidelity to life as
it is. “The Jewels of the Madonna” might serve as an episode in a novel
of Dostoïevsky, or of Balzac; as an opera libretto it is a monstrosity.


IV. WHEN MUSIC AND DRAMA ARE FITLY JOINED

I have referred to these various inconsistencies and absurdities of
opera, not with the idea of making out a case against it; on the
contrary, I want to make out a case for it. This obviously can be done
only by means of operas which are guiltless of absurdities and of
melodramatic exaggeration, which answer the requirements of artistic
reasonableness, and are, at the same time, beautiful. This cannot
be said of “Cavalleria Rusticana” (Rustic Chivalry--Heaven save the
mark!), “La Bohème,” “La Tosca,” “The Girl of the Golden West,” “Thaïs”
(poison, infidelity, suicide, sorcery, and religion mixed up in an
intolerable _mélange_), “Contes d’Hoffman” (a Don Juan telling his
adventures in detail)--these are bad art, not because they are immoral,
but because they are untrue, distorted, without sense of the value of
the material they employ.

Operas which are both beautiful and reasonable do exist, and one or
two of them are actually in our present-day repertoire. The questions
we have to ask are these: Can a highly imaginative and significant
drama, in which action and reflection hold a proper balance, in which
some great and moving passion or some elemental human motives find true
dramatic expression--can such a drama exist as opera? Is it possible
to preserve the body and the spirit of drama and at the same time to
preserve the body and spirit of music? Does not one of these have to
give way to the other? We want opera to be one thing, and not several.
We want the same unity which exists in other artistic forms. We want to
separate classic, romantic, and realistic. If opera changes from blank
verse to rhymed verse, so to speak, we want the change to be dictated
by an artistic necessity as it is in “As You Like It.” We want, above
all, such a reasonable correspondence between seeing and hearing
as shall make it possible for us to preserve each sense unimpaired
by the other. A few such operas have been composed. A considerable
number approach this ideal. From Gluck’s “Orfeo” (produced in 1762) to
Wagner’s “Tristan” (1865) the pure conception of opera has always been
kept alive. Gluck, Mozart, Weber, Wagner, and Verdi are the great names
that stand out above the general level.

Gluck’s “Orfeo” is even more interesting since the dark shadow of
Strauss’s “Electra” has appeared to throw it into relief. Once in
a decade or two “Orfeo” is revived to reveal anew how nobly Gluck
interpreted the old Greek story. And it must be remembered that Gluck
lived in the latter part of the eighteenth century, when music
was quite inflexible in the matter of those dissonances which are
considered by modern composers absolutely necessary to the expression
of dramatic passion.

After Gluck came Mozart with his “Don Giovanni,” preserving the same
balance between action and emotion, with an even greater unity of
style and the same sincerity of utterance. Mozart possessed a supreme
mastery over all his material, and a unique gift for creating pure
and lucid melody. In his operas there is no admixture: his tragedy
and his comedy are alike purely objective--_and it is chiefly this
quality which prevents our understanding them_. We, in our day and
age, cannot project ourselves into Mozart’s _milieu_; the tragedy at
the close of “Don Giovanni” moves us no whit because it is devoid of
shrieking dissonances and thunders of orchestral sound. Our nervous
systems are adjusted to instrumental cataclysms. (We are conscious
only of a _falling_ star; the serene and placid Heavens look down
on us in vain.) Could we hear “Don Giovanni” in a small opera house
sung in pure classic style, we should realize how beautiful it is; we
should no longer crave the over-excitement and unrestrained passion
of “La Tosca”; we should understand that the deepest passion is
expressible without tearing itself to tatters, and that music may be
unutterably tragic in simple major and minor mode. Don Giovanni is a
type of operatic hero,--he may be found in some modified form in half
the operas ever written,--but Mozart lifts him far above his petty
intrigues and makes him a great figure standing for certain elements
in human nature. (It is the failure of Gounod to accomplish this which
puts “Faust” on the lower plane it occupies.) The stage setting of “Don
Giovanni,”--the conventional rooms with gilt chairs, and the like,--the
costumes, the acting, the music (orchestral and vocal), are all unified
in one style. And this, coupled with the supreme mastery and the
melodic gift of its composer, makes it one of the most perfect, if not
the most perfect, of operas.

Beethoven’s “Fidelio” (produced in 1805) celebrates the devotion
and self-sacrifice of a woman--and that devotion and self-sacrifice
actually have for their object _her husband_! It is a noble opera,
but Beethoven’s mind and temperament were not suited to the operatic
problem, and “Fidelio” is not by any means a perfect work of art. The
Beethoven we hear there is the Beethoven of the slow movements of the
sonatas and symphonies; but we could well hear “Fidelio” often, for it
stands alone in its utter sincerity and grandeur.

The romantic operas of Weber tend toward that characterization
which is the essential equality of his great successor, Wagner,
for “Der Freischütz” and “Euryanthe” are full of characteristic
music. Weber begins and ends romantic opera. (Romantic subjects
are common enough, but romantic treatment is exceedingly uncommon.
Scott’s “Bride of Lammermoor,” for example, in passing through the
hands of librettist and composer becomes--in Donizetti’s “Lucia di
Lammermoor”--considerably tinged with melodrama.) There is evidence
enough in “Der Freischütz” and “Euryanthe” of Weber’s sincerity and
desire to make his operas artistic units. Each of them conveys a
definite impression of beauty and avoids those specious appeals so
common in opera.

Meanwhile, in the early part of the nineteenth century, _opéra
comique_ was flourishing in France. Auber, Hérold, Boieldieu, and other
composers were producing works in which the impossible happenings of
grand opera were made possible by humor and lightness of touch. The
words of these composers are full of delightful melody and are more
reasonable and true than are many better-known grand operas.

Then comes the Wagnerian period, with its preponderance of drama over
music. In “Tristan und Isolde” Wagner, by his own confession, turned
away from preconceived theories and composed as his inner spirit moved
him. “Tristan” is, therefore, the work of an artist rather than of a
theorist, and although it is based on the _leit-motif_ and on certain
other important structural ideas which belong to the Wagnerian scheme,
it rises far above their limitations and glows with the real light of
genius. In “Tristan” the action is suited to the psychology. It is a
great work of art and the most beautiful of all recantations. In it we
realize how finely means may be adjusted to ends, how clearly music
and text may be united, how reasonable is the use of the _leit-motif_
when it characterizes beings aflame with passion; how the song, under
the influence of great dramatic situations, can be expanded; how
vividly the orchestra can interpret and even further the actions; how
even the chorus can be fitted into the dramatic scheme--everywhere in
“Tristan” there is unity. This is not true of most of Wagner’s other
operas. “Die Meistersinger” comes nearest to “Tristan” in this respect.
May we not say that of all the music-dramas of Wagner, “Tristan” and
“Die Meistersinger” lay completely in his consciousness unmixed with
philosophical ideas and theories? In them the _leit-motif_ deals
chiefly with emotions or with characteristics of persons rather than
with inanimate objects, or ideas; in them is no grandiose scenic
display; no perversity of theory, but only beautiful music wedded to a
fitting text.

Wagner’s reforms were bound to bring about a reaction, which came in
due season and resulted in shorter and more direct works, such as those
of the modern Italians. No operas since Wagner, save Verdi’s “Otello”
and “Falstaff,” approach the greatness of his music-dramas, and the
tendency of many of these later works has been too much toward what we
mildly call “decadence.” But there is a great difference between the
truthfulness and artistic validity of “Carmen” and that of “La Bohème”
and “La Tosca.” The former is packed full of genuine passion, however
primitive, brutal, and devastating it may be; and its technical skill
is undoubted.

The most interesting phrase of modern opera is found in the works
of the Russians. It was inevitable that they should overturn our
delicately adjusted artistic mechanism. Dostoïevsky’s “The Brothers
Karamazov” is as though there never had been a Meredith or a Henry
James, and Moussorgsky’s “Boris Godounov” is as though there had never
been a Mozart or a Wagner. It has something of that amorphous quality
which seems to be a part of Russian life, but, on the other hand, it
has immense vitality. How refreshing to see a crowd of peasants look
like peasants, and to hear them sing their own peasant songs; and what
stability they give to the whole work! “Boris Godounov” gravitates, as
it were, around these folk-songs, which give to it a certain reality
and truthfulness.


V. OPERA AS A HUMAN INSTITUTION

These various works have long since been accepted by the musical
world as the great masterpieces in operatic form. Many of them are
practically out of the present repertoire of our opera houses. Were we
to assert ourselves--were the general public given an opportunity to
choose between good and bad--we should hear them often. And who shall
say what results might not come from a small and properly managed opera
house, with performances of fine works at reasonable prices?

Opera is controlled by a few rich men who think it a part of the
life of a great city that there should be an opera house with a fine
orchestra, fine scenery, and the greatest singers obtainable. It does
not exist for the good of the whole city, but rather for those of
plethoric purses. It does not make any attempt to become a sociological
force; it does not even dimly see what possibilities it possesses
in that direction. Opera houses and opera companies are sedulously
protected against any sociological scrutiny. They are persistently
reported to be hot-beds of intrigue; they trade on society and on the
love of highly paid singing; they surround themselves with an exotic
atmosphere in which the normal person finds difficulty in breathing,
and which often turns the opera singer into a strange specimen of the
_genus_ man or woman; they go to ruin about once in so often, and are
extricated by the unnecessarily rich; they are too little related to
the community that supports them save in the mediums of money and
social convention.

These artificial and false conditions are bound to bring evils in their
train, but these conditions and these evils are chiefly the result
of our own complacency. Were opera in any sense domestic; were opera
singers to some extent, at least, human beings like ourselves, moving
in a reasonable world; did we go to hear opera as we go to a symphony
concert, or to an art museum,--to satisfy our love of beauty, and
quicken our imagination by contact with beautiful objects; were the
conditions of performance such as to enable us to hear the words, then
would opera become a fine human institution, then would it take its
place among the noble dreams of humanity.

In my endeavor to make some distinctions between good and bad opera
I have drawn a somewhat arbitrary line. I do not wish to give the
impression that I think all opera on one side of the line is bad and
on the other good. I have tried to strike a just balance by applying
certain admitted principles of artistic construction and expression.
From these principles, which lie at the basis of life and, therefore,
of art, opera has unjustly claimed immunity.

And finally we come to that point in our argument where reasoning must
stop altogether. For opera is to many people a sort of fascination
entirely outside reason. They refuse to admit it as a subject of
discussion; they enjoy the spectacle on the stage and the spectacle
of which they are a part; the sight of three thousand people well
dressed like themselves comforts them; the fine singing, costumes, and
stage-setting, the gorgeous orchestra throbbing with passion entirely
unbridled--all these they enjoy in that mental lassitude which is dear
to them. They are, perhaps, slightly uncomfortable at a symphony
concert; here there are no obligations. Opera is, in short, to such
people a slightly illicit æsthetic adventure.




CHAPTER VI

THE SYMPHONY


I. WHAT IS A SYMPHONY?

In the first chapter I discussed the nature of music itself in order
that I might clear away certain popular misconceptions about it and
arrive at some estimate of what it really is. In the intervening
chapters I have dealt with various phases of music: I have discussed
it in connection with words or action, as a sociological force, and
as a matter of pedagogy, and in so doing I have had to take into
consideration all sorts of non-musical factors. Now the symphony is
“pure music,” so called; it exists as a separate and distinct thing
whose only purpose is to be beautiful and true to life. Furthermore it
has always been largely independent of its audience. The opera has been
subject to the vagaries of singers, to the demands of the audience for
fine costumes and scenery; the symphony, on the contrary, has grown
naturally and freely, being hindered only by the slow development of
instruments and of the technique of playing them. Nearly every great
symphony has persisted in the face of the opposition of the public
and of many of the critics; the gibes hurled at the First Symphony
of Brahms were as bitter as those hurled at the Second Symphony of
Beethoven. In discussing, therefore, what is undoubtedly the greatest
of musical forms, I desire first to state as nearly as may be what, in
its essence, it is.

A symphony is, of course, like other music in being an arrangement
of rhythmic figures, of melodies (usually called “themes”) and of
harmonies. But before describing it as such--before dealing with its
materials, its form, its history, and its place in the art of music--I
wish to treat it solely as a thing of beauty expressed in terms of
sound. Many people seem to think music an art dealing with objects or
with ideas. Some, never having become sensitized to it in childhood,
look upon it as of no importance whatever. A large number have tried
to perform it on an instrument and have failed. Others have succeeded
at the price of thinking of it only in terms of technique. A certain
happy few, some of whom can perform it, and some of whom cannot, are
satisfied to take it as it is and be stimulated by it. These are the
true musicians and we should all aspire to join their happy company.

What we call a symphony is merely a series of ordered sounds produced
by means of instruments of various kinds. It is sound and nothing
else. Our programme books tell us about “first themes” and “second
themes,” and we make what effort we can to patch together the various
brilliant textures of symphonic music into a coherent pattern, but
the music we seek lies behind these outward manifestations as, in a
lesser sense, the significance of a great poem lies behind the actual
words. So it is with all the greatest art, whatever the medium may
be. The chief difference between a symphony and any other form of
artistic expression--such as a novel, a play, a painting, or a piece
of sculpture--is that a symphony is not a record of something else; it
is not a picture of something else; it is itself only. And it is this
quality or property of being itself that gives to all pure music its
remarkable power. Any intelligent person, on being shown a diagram or
plan of a symphonic movement, could be made to understand how and why
the material was so disposed, for that disposition is dictated to the
composer by the nature of sound and by the limitations and capacities
of human beings, and it conforms to certain principles which operate
everywhere; but that understanding would not reveal the symphony to him.

There is in every one of us a region of sensibility in which mind and
emotion are blended and from which the imagination acts, and it is to
this sensibility that music appeals. Now, the imagination, which we
believe to be the highest function of human beings, cannot act from
the mind alone. Mathematics, for example, does not lie entirely in
the domain of the mind, and the same thing may be said of any other
department of science. The chief value of scientific studies in school
and university lies in the stimulation of the student’s imagination
rather than in the acquisition of scientific facts. Now, we cannot
conceive any act of the imagination whatever that does not glow with
the radiance of emotion, so that music, in appealing to the whole
being, is not so completely isolated as is generally supposed. But
the simultaneous appeal of music to the mind and the feelings has led
to much confusion on the part of writers who have not been sensitive
to all its qualities. In his essay on “Education” Herbert Spencer, for
example, in discussing the union of science and poetry, says: “It is
doubtless true that, as states of consciousness, cognition and emotion
tend to exclude each other. And it is doubtless true also that an
extreme activity of the feelings tends to deaden the reflective powers:
in which sense, indeed, all orders of activity are antagonistic to
each other.” Now this statement reveals at once the limitations of a
philosophic mind when dealing with something that requires apprehension
by the feelings also. In listening to music the reflective powers are
not engaged with objects or with definite ideas, but with pure sound
that requires correlation only with itself, and the condition of mutual
exclusion between thought and feeling no longer exists because the
music is expressing thought and feeling _in the same terms_.[9] Spencer
speaks of science as full of poetry, which is true enough, but his
statement about music reveals an incapacity to understand it. And his
misconceptions about art in general may be illustrated by the following
concerning the axis in sculpture as applied to a standing figure: “But
sculptors unfamiliar with the theory of equilibrium not uncommonly
so represent this attitude that the line of direction falls midway
between the feet. Ignorance of the laws of momentum leads to analogous
errors; as witness the admired Discobolus, which, as it is posed,
must inevitably fall forward the moment the quoit is delivered.” This
observation completely misses the quite sound reasons for the pose of
that remarkable statue, and, if applied to sculpture in general, would
destroy the famous “Victory of Samothrace” and many other fine examples
of Greek sculpture.

But it is strange and mysterious, after all, that these ordered sounds
should be so precious to us; that we should preserve their printed
symbols generation after generation and continually reproduce them as
sound, feeling them to be strong and stable and true; that we should
even come to say, after many generations, that their creator was a
wise man who had in him a profound philosophy. But it is stranger
still to realize how convincing this philosophy is as compared to any
philosophy of the reason, and to see how profound in it is the sense of
reconciliation--a reconciliation that the mind seeks in vain. Our life
consists of thought, feeling, and action, phenomena of what we are, and
in actual life never quite reconcilable. But the world of music is not
actual life. Music is absolved from actual phenomena, and achieves by
virtue of this freedom a complete and profound philosophy--a philosophy
unintelligible to the mind alone, but intelligible to the complete
being. The strength of every art lies chiefly in its detachment from
reality. Sculpture does not gain by being realistic, picturesque, or
decorative; on the contrary, it is at its highest when it is ideal,
detached, and superhuman. Painting does not gain by being categorical,
but is greatest when it seeks something beyond the outward, physical
view. The novel or the essay depends for its greatness on its power of
relating real persons, things, and ideas to that greater and deeper
reality of which they are a part. In this sense music stands supreme
above the other arts because it is the most detached. The elements of
thought and feeling are, in music, presented as elements; the thought
is not thought even in the abstract, for it is not “about” anything;
the feeling is not actual feeling, and the action is not real action.
Each of these properties or states of the human being is here expressed
in its essence, detached from all actual manifestation. None but the
highest type of mind, none but a heart full of deep human sympathy,
none but a vigorous militant spirit could have conceived and brought
forth such compositions, for example, as the Third and Ninth Symphonies
of Beethoven, yet they are nothing but sound--neither the thought nor
the feeling nor the action is real.

But we may also truly say that in Conrad’s novel it is not the person,
Lord Jim, who moves us, but rather the author’s deep insight into the
elements of human character expressed through the central figure. A
portrait by Velasquez is a portrait of the personality that lived
within the outward appearance. The figure of Pendennis is not so much
the youth by that name as it is youth itself--youth, care-free, but
bound by tradition and love. All great art is subjective, lying in the
mind of man.

It is from this point of view, then, that I approach the symphony. I do
not need now to dwell on its history, on its form, or on its means of
expression, because they are merely incidental to its being a profound
human document. Pure music at its highest is the will of man made
manifest, and one may doubt if that will becomes fully manifest in any
other of his creations. It compasses all his actions, all his thoughts,
all his feelings; it translates his dreams; it satisfies his insatiable
curiosities; it justifies his pride (as he himself never does); it
makes him the god he would be; it is like a crystal ball, in whose
mystic depths the whole of life moves in a shadow fantasy.


II. HOW SHALL WE UNDERSTAND IT?

It is obvious, then, that the only possible way to understand a
symphony is to accept it as it is and not try to make it into something
else. Music is not a language; it does not exist in other terms, but
is untranslatable. When a trumpet blares and you make any of the
conventional associations with the trumpet, such as a battle, a hunt,
a proclamation, a signal, off goes your mind on a stream of alien
ideas that may carry you anywhere and that will certainly carry you
farther and farther away from the music itself. Each of the orchestral
instruments has its own individual association--the oboe reminds you
of a shepherd’s pipe, the flute of a bird’s song, the French horn of
hunting, and so forth; but each one of the instruments in the orchestra
as you listen to it is forming lines, and adding colors, as it were, in
a great design. And this design, always complete at any one point, goes
on unceasingly forming itself ever and ever anew. It is always complete
and always incomplete, always moving onward, always delicately poised
for inevitable flight. As you listen you have lived a thousand lives;
dream after dream has dissolved itself in your consciousness; each
moment has been a perfect and complete existence in itself. When it is
finished you awake to what you call happiness or unhappiness, peace or
struggle, satisfaction or chagrin; the unreal spectacle of the world
imposes itself upon you again; you are once more a human being. Why ask
that glorious world in which your nature has been freed and your soul
has been disencumbered of your body to assume all the imperfections of
this one? The gods, of necessity, dwell in the heavens. No, you cannot
understand music by translating it into other terms, or by preserving
your associations with the world in which you live. Mind and feeling,
sublimated by the magic of these sounds, must detach themselves and
rise to a world of pure imagination where there is no locality.

Reconciliation! A philosophy without a category; a religion without a
dogma; an indestructible shadow world which offers no explanations,
promulgates no opinions, and has no mission--which exists completely
in itself. What more shall we ask for? Why cry to the heavens for a
manifestation? Why take refuge in a so-called “system” of philosophy?
Why shuffle off the whole problem on a dogma? What comfort to a
squirrel in a cage to know the number of its bars? Is our slow
and inevitable progress from the unknown to the unknown any more
significant because we have learned to tell our beads, intellectual,
religious, or æsthetic, to mumble our little formulæ, and to pick our
way, eyes downward, amongst the stones and thorns, never once glancing
clear-eyed upward to the sun? We have always sought a fourth dimension,
and have always had it. We want what we have not; we wish to be what we
are not; and all the time they have been within our grasp. We make a
far away heaven to answer this universal cry, when our hand is on its
very doorlatch. Our imagination falters most when we apply it to things
nearest us. Where _can_ heaven be if not here? Is it an omnibus in
which you may secure a comfortable seat by paying your fare? Or is it
a state of yourself toward which you continually struggle and to which
you occasionally attain?

This, then, is my thesis. A symphony is not merely an arrangement of
rhythms, melodies, and harmonies; it is not a record of the thoughts,
feelings, and deeds of men; it is not a picture of man or of nature.
Rather does it launch itself from these into the unknown. It is pure
imagination freed from the actual.

The foregoing does not, in any sense, preclude that idea of a symphony
which is expressible in terms of rhythm, melody, and harmony. What
I have said has been said for the purpose of preventing a conception
of it _in these terms only_ (and, of course, in still lower terms).
Our physical hearing is a transit to the imagination and we want the
physical hearing to serve that purpose. Nothing retards it more than
an attempt _at the time_ to intellectualize the process. In other
words, listening to a symphony should consist in giving yourself
freely to it; in making of yourself a passive medium. Your study of
the arrangement of themes, and so forth, should precede or follow
the actual experience. And if you have no leisure or opportunity for
such study and depend entirely on an occasional concert, you should
nevertheless continue to pursue the same inactivity, allowing the music
itself to increase your susceptibility little by little. If the mind is
employed in an attempt to extricate order from confusion, it usurps for
the moment the other functions of listening. And I would go so far as
to say that the proper goal of a musical education should be to arrive
at such a state of impressionability to pure music as would leave the
mind, the feelings, and the imagination free to act subconsciously
without active direction, and without struggle. The matter is so
obvious. There is the music; here is the person. It awaits him. It was
created of him and for him. It is inconceivable without him. It is his
spirit coming back to him purified. It is the only thing he cannot
sully, and which cannot sully him, for in the very nature of it, it
cannot be turned to base uses. What man would be, here he is. In making
this beautiful spectacle of life, as Conrad says, he has found its
only explanation. So we should avoid marring the actual experience by
conscious intent on the technical details.

What I have said thus far may seem of but slight assistance to the
average person who attends symphony concerts. I have stated what I
thought symphonic music to be, and have urged my readers not to listen
to it analytically. But my purpose here is not to attempt to blaze an
easy path for the music-lover; in fact, I am unqualifiedly opposed to
that too common practice of æsthetic writing. There is no easy path,
and an attempt to find one is disastrous to any progress whatever.
Every person who has attained to a real understanding of æsthetic
objects knows that the growth of that understanding has been slow.
The characteristic weakness of our artistic status is self-deception.
We are not frank with ourselves; we are unwilling to admit ourselves
in ignorance; we advance opinions which are not our own. The only
possible basis for advancement in anything is intellectual honesty.
Information about a symphony is useless unless there is a real appeal
in the music itself. So I do not attempt to provide here a panacea;
just the opposite is my purpose. All I want to do is to show that the
symphony is worth struggling for, and to brush away such misconceptions
about it as might retard the progress of those who have the will and
the perseverance to struggle. And when there is no will to struggle,
nothing can be accomplished. What is called “mental lassitude” is
almost a contradiction in terms.

It is obvious that a proper musical education would have solved our
problems in a natural manner. If, as children, we had been taught to
sing only beautiful songs; if we had been trained to listen to music;
if our memory for musical phrases, rhythms, etc., had been cultivated,
we should be quick in apprehending all the qualities of a symphony,
for all our analytical reasoning would have been done beforehand. And
nothing can ever take the place of such an education, because the
natural taste for music, which is so strong in childhood, has in us
been allowed to lapse. So that our first duty is to our children. We
want them to avoid our mistakes. In every household, in every school,
public or private, this ideal of music-study should be upheld--namely,
that the children should enter life so prepared by their early training
as to be able to enjoy the greatest music.

I take a form of pure music as a type of our highest attainment,
because when music is allied to words or to action it gives certain
hostages. Furthermore, the symphony evolved slowly under the law of
its own being, and it represents the application to music of those
general laws of proportion and balance, of unity and variety, which
govern all artistic expression. It has never been subjected to alien
influences; popularity has not been its motive power; virtuosity has
never dictated to it. If you understand the symphony you can apply that
understanding to any other form of music. If one compares it with the
opera this distinction is at once evident. In the opera that antagonism
of which Spencer speaks between states of feeling and of cognition does
exist, because the mind is there appealed to through objects rather
than through pure sound. The symphony speaks in its own terms; opera
speaks in terms of characters in action, of costume and of scenery,
as well as of music. Even the greatest operas cause you to reflect on
something outside themselves--on human motives as they find expression
in human action. In either “Don Giovanni” or “Tristan,” although the
music reaches great heights of beauty and is profoundly moving, there
is the inevitable struggle between seeing and hearing, the inevitable
difficulty between a simultaneous state of cognition and of feeling.
The symphony entirely escapes this dilemma. Np doubt great motives lie
beneath it; no doubt it, too, is a drama of human life, for otherwise
it could not be great as a work of art; but the play of motives in a
symphony is hidden behind the impenetrable veil of sound. The Third,
Fifth, and Ninth Symphonies of Beethoven are truly dramatic, but only
in this sense. They range from the tender to the terrible; they have
their own emotional climaxes; they philosophize, they brood, they grin
like a comic mask; action and reaction follow each other as in life
itself; nothing is lacking but that one inconsequential thing, reality.
Art is truth; life is but a shadow fading to nothingness as the sun
sets.


III. THE MATERIALS OF THE SYMPHONY

I have said that the symphony evolved slowly under the laws of its
own being, and I wish to state briefly and (as far as possible) in
simple terms how that evolution came about. If I should go back to the
very beginning I should have to point out that the primal difference
between music and noise consists in the intensity of vibration and in
the grouping of the sounds into regular series by means of accents. A
series of unaccented tones does not make music. If a clock, in striking
twelve, should, by accenting certain strokes, throw the whole number
into regular groups, it would supply the basis for music. In any great
piece of martial music these accents and these impulses in groups
constitute the element that moves us to comply with it ourselves; we
beat time with hand or foot; we are infused with the momentum. And
the force of the impetus may be observed at the close of nearly every
piece of music where conventional chords ease off its stress. The last
forty measures of the Fifth Symphony of Beethoven constitute a sort
of brake on the huge moving mass. Chopin’s Polonaise, opus 26, number
1, on the contrary, does not end; it stops. In Fielding’s “Tom Jones”
the impetus of the action is carried on so far that the climax is
postponed to a point dangerously near the end of the book, which leaves
us with a sense of breathlessness or even of aggravation. In music,
when this impetus is of extreme vigor, any temporary displacement of
it produces almost the effect of a cataclysm--as in the first movement
of Beethoven’s Third Symphony, where great chords in twos clash across
already established metrical groups of threes. Within the metrical
groups all sorts of subdivisions may exist, and these constitute what
is called “rhythm” in music. Rhythm, in brief, is the variety which any
melody imposes on the regular beats that constitute its time basis.

It is from this rhythmic movement that the symphony gets its quality
of action, and the precursors of the symphony in this respect were
the old folk-songs and dance-tunes the melodies of which are full of
rhythmic diversity. The line from these early naïve compositions down
to symphonic music was never broken, and there is hardly a symphony in
existence that does not pay direct tribute to them.

I dwell on this point at some length because here lies a large part
of the energy of music. The rhythmic figures to which I have already
referred contain within themselves a primal force. They are capable
of throwing off parts of themselves, and these, caught in the primary
orbit, live as separate identities, until the too powerful attraction
of the greater mass absorbs them again. As rhythm, then, a symphonic
movement is like sublimated physical energy. As the first oscillations
of its impulse strike our consciousness we are caught up into a world
of movement which has the inevitability of star courses. We ourselves
are all rhythm--rhythm imprisoned and awaiting release. In music we
become one with all that ceaseless movement or vibration without
which there would be no physical or spiritual world at all. I say,
then, that rhythm is the very heart of music; that while we are all
susceptible to it (though comparatively few people can move their hands
or feet or bodies in perfect rhythm--they would be much better off if
they could!) we do not altogether see what significance it has as an
æsthetic property of music. When the heart of music stops beating (as
in one of Beethoven’s scherzi) we are surprised, or perhaps disturbed,
not answering to the marvelous silence; when two or even three rhythms
are acting simultaneously we are confused and helpless before the most
fascinating of æsthetic phenomena.

Let me next dwell briefly on that element in the evolution of symphonic
music which consists in the use of several themes simultaneously.
Should we trace this back to its original we should find ourselves in
the ninth century. Now, while I know that this is not the place for a
dissertation on any abstruse musical terms, I shall venture this much,
not only because this method of writing is used in nearly all really
fine music, but because a large part of the pleasure to be derived
from listening to a symphony depends on our capacity to follow the
varied strands of melody that constitute it. Is it not so, also, with
the novel? The chief theme of Meredith’s “The Egoist” has numberless
counter-themes running through and around it. It is not by any means
to be found in Sir Willoughby alone, for you understand it through
Vernon’s good sense, through Clara’s dart-like intuitions, through
Mr. Middleton’s patient surprise at having such a daughter, through
Letitia, and Crossjay, and Horace De Cray--all these are continually
explaining and illuminating the theme for you. It is true that music
asks you to listen to several melodies at once, but what does the
episode of Crossjay’s unwitting listening to Sir Willoughby’s belated
declaration to Letitia ask you to do? Is it enough merely to record
the scene as it is unfolded to you? Or do you remember Crossjay’s
father stumping up the avenue in his ill-fitting clothes? Clara’s
intercessions for Crossjay? Vernon’s attempts to adjust himself to
Sir Willoughby’s overbearing grandiloquence? And do you not have to
remember, especially, that Crossjay had been locked out of his room by
Sir Willoughby and had sought the ottoman as a refuge? These are all
strands of the chief melody in that remarkable composition. (Not all
the strands are there, for satire never tells the whole truth. “Tony”
in Ethel Sidgwick’s “Promise” and “Succession” is also an egoist.) A
novel, then, in this sense, is not successive, but _simultaneous_. All
that has been and all that is to be exist in every moment of life, for
that is all what we call “the present” means. The chief difference
between such play of character around an idea and the movement of
many musical themes around a central one lies in the detached and
spiritualized quality of sound.

It is obvious that music, written for an orchestra containing some
twenty or more different _kinds_ of instruments and scores of
performers, must have great variety of expression. Each instrument has
its own tone color, its own range, and its own technique, and each
must be given its own thing to say. In this sense symphonic music is
an intricate mesh of melodies, each intent on its own purpose, each a
part of the whole. In no other of its varied means of expression is
the symphony more strictly and more fully an evolution than in this
one of complex melodic textures. There has been no hiatus. From its
first great moment of perfection in the time of Palestrina, through the
madrigal and fugue, through dance-tunes conventionalized in the suite,
through organ pieces, oratorios, and the like, this method of writing
has persisted. Wagner bases his whole musical structure on the play and
interplay of melodic lines in his _leit-motifs_. Bach is all melodic
texture. Music written in this manner is called “polyphonic,” and the
method of writing it is called “counterpoint.”

In direct contrast to this is “monodic” music which employs only one
melody against an accompaniment of chords. A large part of the music
we hear is monodic; an aria by Puccini, a popular song, most church
music--these have one melody only. So has Poe’s “For Annie.” Polyphonic
music has the great advantage of being intensive in its expression; it
evolves out of itself. When I say that almost the whole of the first
movement of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony is evolved out of a few measures
near the beginning, I mean that the melodic fragments of the theme
take on a life of their own and by so doing illustrate and expound
the significance of the original thesis from which they sprang. This
quality, or property in music, upon which I have laid some stress, is,
then, not so much a matter of technique as of æsthetics. The thing done
and the manner of doing it is each the result of general laws, and I
venture to dwell on them here, not for expert, technical reasons, but
because I wish to offer the listener to symphonies one of his most
delightful opportunities. Note should finally be made of the important
fact that only those symphonic themes which have a varied and vibrant
rhythm serve well the purpose of counterpoint, for the essence of
instrumental counterpoint lies in setting against each other two or
more melodic phrases in contrasting rhythms.

I do not mean to imply by the foregoing that symphonic music
persistently employs counterpoint as against simple melody. There are
whole passages in the symphonies of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven where
one tune is given out against an accompaniment of chords, and a lyric
composer like Schubert employs counterpoint somewhat rarely. But in
the greatest symphonies the predominating method of expression is
through polyphony.

In writing about counterpoint I have dwelt on the rhythmic quality
in melody, and have stated that a well-defined and varied rhythm is
essential to contrapuntal treatment. I might almost have said that
all good melody depends on rhythm. I do say--expecting many a silent
protest from certain of my readers--that all the greatest melodies have
a finely adjusted rhythm, and I apply this statement to all melody
from the folk-song to the present time. I might enumerate beautiful
melodies whose effect depends on other properties than rhythm,--as the
second melody in Chopin’s Nocturne in G major, opus 37, number 2,--but
I should add that, as melody, existing by itself, it is not fine and
the reason is that its rhythm is monotonous.[10] And when I say it is
not fine, I mean that it is not highly imaginative, and that it depends
too much on its harmonization. And when, in turn, I say that, I mean,
perforce, that it is too emotional. The difference between such a theme
and one with a really fine rhythm is the difference between Poe’s “The
Raven” and Keats’s “Ode to a Grecian Urn.” In the former the mind is
being continually lulled by the soft undulation of the rhythms and
rhymes; in the latter the mind is being continually stimulated by their
complexities. Yet Keats’s ode is as unified as Poe’s lyric. There are
melodies for songs for the pianoforte, for the violin, and for the
orchestra; there are sonata melodies and there are symphonic melodies
just as there is a shape for a hatchet and a shape for a pair of
scissors--which is only stating once again the old law that the style
must suit the medium of expression, or that the shape must suit the
uses to which a thing is put. Symphonic themes, in contradistinction
to themes for songs or short pianoforte pieces, or dances, should be
inconclusive; they are valuable for what they presage rather than for
what they state, and they should indicate their own destiny. The four
notes with which the Fifth Symphony of Beethoven begins are so,--in
fact the whole theme is valueless by itself,--but they contain enough
pent-up energy to vitalize not only the first movement, but the three
which follow it. If it were possible for each reader of these words
to hear--as an interlude to his reading--a series of great symphonic
melodies, and if he would listen to them carefully, he would find
almost every one to contain a finely adjusted rhythm.

Symphonic themes present certain difficulties to the listener whose
understanding of melody is limited to a square-cut strophic tune. He
is accustomed to a certain musical punctuation--a comma (so to speak)
after the first and third lines of the music, a semicolon after the
second, and a period at the end. And when he gets an extra period
thrown in (as he does after the third line of the tune “America”)
he is all the happier. When he hears the opening theme of the
“Eroica” Symphony break in two in the middle and fall apart, he gets
discouraged, for his musical imagination has not been sufficiently
developed to see that that very breaking apart presages the tragic
turmoil of the whole movement. When Brahms gives out, in the opening
measures of his Third Symphony, two themes at once, he does not fathom
the element of strife which is involved, and so cannot follow its
progress to the final triumph of one of them.

But the symphony contains everything, and there is a place in it for
lyric melody, provided the flight be long and sweeping. The “slow
movement” of a symphony contains such themes, but they are not content
to be merely fine melodies. They, too, must contain some potentiality
which is afterwards realized. The best and most familiar example will
be found in Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony, where the first rhythmic unit
(contained in the first three notes) of the beautiful romantic theme
detaches itself and pursues an almost scandalous existence full of
delicate pranks and grimaces, and comic quips and turns, now gentle,
now ironic, now pretending to be sentimental, until it finally rejoins
the theme again. This piece is a romance touched with comedy--a romance
great enough to suffer all the by-play without the least dilution of
its quality.

Any attempt in a book like this to explain the intricacies of harmonic
development as it is seen in the symphony must be inconclusive. Harmony
is, in itself, less tangible than either rhythm or melody, for it
lacks to a considerable extent the element of continuity. I mean by
this that groups of harmonies do not possess coherence in relation to
each other. They do not stay in the memory as a line of melody does;
the impression we get from them is fleeting. It may touch with light or
shade one brief moment in a piece of music (as it frequently does in
Schubert’s compositions); it may produce a bewildering riot of color
(as in ultra-modern music); or it may cover the whole piece with a
subdued shadow (as in the slow movement of Franck’s quintette). But the
real office of harmony is to serve melody. I mean by this that when
two or more melodies sound together they make harmony at every point
of contact, and this harmony, incidental to the movement of melodic
parts, has a reality which chords by themselves cannot acquire. And
the whole justification for many of the sounds in ultra-modern music
lies in this one perfectly correct theory. Not that the laws must not
be obeyed--as they frequently are not; not that a composer may violate
nature, and do what he likes. He must, as of old, justify in reason
all the dissonances arising from his melodic adventures. He should
remember Bach, whose melodies clash in never-to-be-forgotten stridence,
striking forth such flashes of strange beauty as can only come from a
war of themes.

The symphony is, then, an arrangement of rhythms, melodies, and
harmonies. Each of these three elements has a life of its own,--the
rhythms, taken altogether, have their own coherence, the melodies
theirs, and the harmonies theirs,--but each belongs to the whole.
The rhythm of Poe’s “For Annie” would be an impossible rhythm with
which to carry forward the purposes of any part of “The Ring and the
Book.” Equally useless would be the rhythms of Schubert’s “Unfinished”
Symphony to carry forward the purposes of Beethoven’s Ninth. The whole
structure of Poe’s poem would disintegrate if one single word fell
out of place; so would the fabric of a Schubert melody were a note
destroyed.

In every direction, wherever we look, this cohesion of all objects in
themselves, this blending of all objects into a greater body, reveals
itself. This is the basis of all religious belief, of a novel, of the
composition of a picture, or of life itself. To say that a symphony is
made up of separate elements, that each of these elements has a life
of its own, and that they all unite in a common purpose, is to state
a truism. And to suppose that a symphony can be understood without an
understanding of all its elements is to suppose an absurdity.


IV. TONE COLOR AND DESIGN

Such has been the development of the elements of symphonic music.
The processes I have described are the natural processes of an art
which is continually striving for wider and deeper expression. And,
speaking humanly, it is not too much to say that within ourselves there
should take place a complete analogue to that development and to those
processes. The connection between ourselves and the sounds may graduate
all the way from complete unconsciousness of their significance (even
though we hear all the sounds clearly) to that state wherein they
strike fire in our souls, and there passes between the imagination of
the composer and our own that spark of undying fire which illumines our
whole being. For in the last analysis it is not so much the music that
communicates itself as it is the soul of the composer reaching us over
whatever stretch of time. He who creates beauty is immortal.

Is not this what we seek? Is not this the object of all beauty
everywhere? Is it not always trying us to see if we are in tune?--as,
indeed, everything else is: labor, love, objects, knowledge,
religion--all these await our answer.

But I should not leave this part of my subject without setting forth
the relation between these elements of symphonic music and the
orchestral instruments by means of which they find expression. I do not
wish to attempt here any account of orchestration, as such, but rather
to point out that in symphonic music it is by the quality of tone that
the essence of an idea is conveyed. The tone of the instrument is like
the inflection of the voice in speaking, wherein the truth is conveyed
although you speak an untruth. An oath might be a prayer but for the
inflection.

The pianoforte or the violin, or any other single instrument, has
but little variety of tone; the orchestra, on the other hand, has
not only four distinct groups of instruments, each group having
its own tone quality, but within two of these groups[11] there are
considerable differences in what is called “tone color.” It is of no
great importance to know that the solo near the beginning of the slow
movement of the César Franck symphony is played on an English horn,
but it is important to feel the quality of the tone, and to realize
how largely the effect of the theme depends on it. For some obscure
reason many people remain insensitive to qualities of tone color.
(Perhaps they have received their musical education at the pianoforte
which, under unskillful hands, differs only in loud and soft.) One so
seldom observes a listener even amused by the antics of Beethoven’s
double-basses, and yet, in at least four of his symphonies, their
behavior is at times extremely ludicrous. He whose humor ranges all
the way from the most delicate, ironic smile to a terrible, tragic
laughter, wherein joy and sorrow meet,--as meet they must when either
presses far,--he achieves these remarkable effects largely by means
of the tone quality of the instruments. In his Fifth Symphony he
creates the most thrilling effect by means of some score or more of
reiterated notes in the soft, muffled tones of the kettle-drum. In
the finale to the First Symphony of Brahms it is the tone of the
French horn, and again of the flute, that creates for us such profound
illusions of beauty as pierce to our very soul. From the depths of the
orchestra the horn chants its ennobled song; then follows the dulcet
blow-pipe of the flute singing the same magic theme. These varied tones
succeeding one another, or melting one into the other--these are the
colors that animate and beautify the forms into which the thoughts
fall. What delicate nonsense filigree the violins draw in the slow
movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony; how sepulchral the bassoon
with its mock sadness; what a vibrant quality do the violoncellos and
the contra-basses give to the great melody in the finale to the Ninth;
with what poignancy does the clarinet give voice to the sentiment of
the second theme in the slow movement of Brahms’s Third Symphony. How
luxurious and vivid is the application of all these varied hues to the
design.

A fine singing voice has, perhaps, the most beautiful of all tone
colors, but the sensibility of many people seems to be limited to
that alone. In fact the love of singing is, in many cases, merely
a sentimental thrill unconnected with any intellectual process and
entirely devoid of imagination. In the orchestra the tone of the
instrument is to the theme itself what the color is to the rose. It
is much more than that, of course, because it is at any time both
retrospective and prospective; _this_ tone color is a darker or lighter
shade of _that_, or, perchance, another hue entirely. The colors shift
from moment to moment always as a part of the design rather than as
mere color.

Taking it all together--rhythm, meter, melody, harmony, and tone
color--this substance of a symphony is a wonderful thing. Nothing
quite so delicately organized has ever been created by the mind and
the imagination of man. With an interplay of parts almost equal to
that of a finely adjusted machine, it seems to go where it wills to go
regardless of anything but a whim. How marvelously does it express
both the actions and the dreams of human beings; how true is it to
their deeper consciousness--a consciousness that dimly fathoms both
life and death; that knows itself to have come from across the ages,
and feels itself to be a part of the ages to come. It is just as likely
that life is a brief, shadowed moment in an endless light, as that it
is “a rapid, blinking stumble across a flick of sunshine.”

FOOTNOTES:

[9] I stated in the first chapter what justification there is for using
the word “intellectual” in regard to music, and I speak here of thought
in that sense.

[10] As examples of melodies with finely adjusted rhythms I may cite
the theme of the slow movement of Beethoven’s pianoforte sonata, opus
13, and that of the slow movement of Brahms’s pianoforte quartette,
opus 60.

[11] In the “wood-wind” group, so called, there are flutes, oboe,
clarinets, bassoons, English horn, etc.; in the brass, there are
trumpets, French horns, trombones, tubas, etc.




CHAPTER VII

THE SYMPHONY (_continued_)


I. THE UNITY OF THE SYMPHONY

For the ordinary listener to a symphony the one great difficulty lies
in “making sense” out of it as a whole. He enjoys certain themes
and is, perhaps, able to follow their devious wanderings, but he
retains no comprehensive impression of the symphony as a complete
thing, and he may even never conceive it as anything more than a
series of interesting or uninteresting passages of music. Now, it is
obvious that an art of pure sound, if it is to have any significance
at all, must have complete coherence _within itself_, and that the
longer the sounds go on the more necessary does this coherence
become. This is, of course, the problem of all music. Even opera must
have a certain musical coherence, for it cannot depend entirely on
being held together by the text and action; even the song must make
musical sense in addition to what sense (by chance) there is in the
words. Give what glowing, what romantic, even what definite title
you will to a piece of programme music,--call it “The Hebrides,” or
“Death and Transfiguration,” or descend to such a title as “A Simple
Confession,”--you must still give your music coherence in itself. As a
matter of fact, the titles of pieces of programme music do not lessen
the composer’s responsibilities in the least, and there is no fine
piece of such music in existence that does not obey the general laws of
form as applied to music. The title is, after all, merely a suggestion,
an indication, an atmosphere. Schumann’s “The Happy Farmer” is merely
jolly; it is not even bucolic, and you hunt for the farmer in vain;
“Träumerei” is made rhythmically vague in order to create the illusion
of reverie, but has, nevertheless, complete musical coherence; “Tod und
Verklärung” of Strauss contains no evidence of sacrificing its form to
its so-called “subject,” and the Wagnerian _leit-motif_ is suggestive
and not didactic.

The development of form in the symphony is too large a subject to
be covered here, but there are certain fundamental aspects of it
upon which I may dwell with safety, since they obey laws which
apply everywhere. To make clear what I mean let me say that an art
whose fundamental quality is movement must have for its problem the
disposition within a certain length of time of a certain group of
themes or melodies. The distinction between this art and that of
painting is that in music the question is “When?” in painting “Where?”
In this sense literature is nearer music than is painting, and I shall
shortly point out some analogies between literary and musical forms.
I stated in the first chapter the fundamental synthetic principle of
music, which is that no one series of sounds formed into a melody can
long survive the substitution of other series, unless there be given
some restatement, or, at least, some reminder of the first. There is
no musical form that does not pay tribute directly or indirectly to
this principle. And this, much modified by the medium of language,
applies also to literature. Most novels contain near the end a “looking
backward over traveled roads”; a too great digression from any thesis
requires a certain restatement of it. The first appearance of Sandra
Belloni is heralded by her singing in the wood near the Poles’ country
house. The epilogue to “Vittoria” closes with the scene in the
cathedral: “Carlo Merthyr Ammiani, standing between Merthyr and her,
with old blind Agostino’s hands upon his head. And then once more, and
but for once, her voice was heard in Milan.” The unessential characters
and motives of Sandra Belloni disappear in “Vittoria”--Mrs. Chump, an
unsuccessful essay in Dickens, finds a deserved oblivion; so do the
“Nice Feelings” and the “Fine Shades”; but the presence of Merthyr in
the cathedral is as necessary to that situation as is the absence of
Wilfred. “War and Peace” would be an inchoate mass of persons, scenes,
and events, were it not for certain retrospects here and there which
hold the whole mass together. “The Idiot” is a striking illustration,
for the early part of Mishkin’s career only appears in the sixth
chapter, as if to tide over more successfully the vastness of the
scheme; and the final chapter brings back most vividly the experiences
of his boyhood. The sonnet is the most concise example of this process,
and I do not need to dwell on the precision with which it illustrates
it.

One great difference exists, however, between music and literature,
and that is in the number of its subjects or characters. “War and
Peace,” to take an extreme example, contains scores of characters,
while a whole symphony would usually contain not more than twelve or
fourteen themes. The prime reason for this is that themes have no
established law of association, and so do not represent something
else with which we are already familiar as do names of persons in
books. We remember the names of such characters as Joseph Andrews or
Tom Jones, or even Dr. Portsoaken, for, although they lived a long
time ago, we have enough word association to contain their names and
we can understand them and can follow the devious courses of their
adventures and the philosophy of life they represent. (The absence of
this association makes it difficult for us to remember the characters
in Russian novels.) When we hear a musical theme, however, we have to
remember it as such.

I have frequently stated the somewhat obvious fact that music obeys
general æsthetic laws, and the foregoing is intended to show how these
laws are modified by the peculiar properties of sound. A symphony in
this sense, then, is a coherent arrangement of themes. This brings
me to the important question of the detachment or the unification
of the several movements of a symphony. Is a symphony one thing or
four? Should we listen to it as a unit, or as separate contrasting
pieces strung together for convenience? The conventional answer to
these questions--the answer given by the textbooks--is that a few
symphonies transfer themes from one movement to another, but that,
speaking generally, a symphony is a collection of four separate pieces
contrasted in speed and in sentiment, etc. Now I wish to combat this
theory as vigorously as possible, and I should like to rely solely
on general æsthetic laws, and say that no great work of art could,
by any possibility, be based on such a heterogeneous plan as that.
Or I might base my opinion on psychology and say that, since there
are four different movements, different in general and in particular
characteristics,--one containing themes which evolve as they proceed,
producing the effect of struggle toward a goal, another suited to
states of sentiment, another for concise and vivid action, and so
forth,--and since the mind of a great man is a microcosm of the world
and contains everything, it follows, as a matter of course, that he
tries to fuse his symphony into one by filling its several parts with
the various elements of himself, a process that has been going on
ever since there has been any music at all. The composer is not four
men, nor is his mind separated into compartments. One symphony will
differ from another because it will represent a different stage in his
development, but any one symphony--unless arbitrarily disjointed--will
express the various phases of its composer’s nature at the time,
and will have a corresponding internal organism. This is sufficient
evidence of the soundness of this view in the great symphonies
themselves. I cannot specify at length here, but any reader having
access to Mozart’s, Beethoven’s, and Brahms’s symphonies or that of
César Franck may investigate for himself. Let me merely point out a
few instances which I choose from celebrated and familiar symphonies.
In the last movement of the C major of Mozart (commonly called the
“Jupiter”) there is a rapid figure in the basses at measures nine
and ten which is derived from the beginning of the first movement.
The theme of the last movement is drawn from--is another version
of--the passage in measures three and four of the first movement. In
Beethoven’s “Eroica” the first theme of the last movement is drawn
directly from the first theme of the first movement. The theme of the
C major section of the “Marche Funèbre” is the theme of the first
section in apotheosis, and each owes a debt to the first theme of the
first movement. Illustrations of this principle could be multiplied
almost indefinitely, and it is not too much to say that there is in all
great music this inward coherence. In other words, form in music is not
merely a sort of framework, or, if you please, a law or precedent, but
the expression of an inward force.

Themes having no organic relation are, of course, introduced in
symphonic movements for the play of action against each other which
results from their antagonism. The novel depends largely on the same
element. If it were not for Blifil there could hardly have been a Tom
Jones. Sandra Belloni must have Mr. Pericles as a foil to that finer
character of hers which rises above the prima donna, and she needs
Wilfred and Merthyr in order to achieve Carlo. In short, the symphonic
movement is not unlike the novel which is based on the juxtaposition
of contrasted or antagonistic characters or elements, the struggle
between the two, and, finally, their reconciliation; and sufficient
analogy could be drawn between this and life itself to illustrate the
principle as a cardinal one. But I believe the symphony to be still in
flux. I see no reason why it should not continue to develop from within
and finally to achieve an even greater inward coherence than that
already attained. This will almost certainly not be brought about by an
extension of its outward form or by an enlargement of its resources--as
is the case with many modern symphonies.[12] In brief, the composer
is an artist like any other; he is dealing with human emotions and
aspirations as other artists are; he is subject to the same laws; he,
too, draws a true picture of human life in true perspective, with all
the adjustments of scene, of persons, of motives, carefully worked
out--even though he deals only with sound. It is almost incredible that
any one should suppose otherwise; the real difficulty is in getting the
ordinary person to suppose anything! So I say that the symphony is a
mirror of life, and that all the great symphonies taken together are
like a book of life in which everything is faithfully set forth in due
proportion and balance.

I have said that the symphony contains everything and that it has room
for disorder. This is its ultimate purpose. The secret of its power
lies in this. Life itself is an inexplicable thing. The great symphony
compresses it into an hour of perfection in which all of its elements
are explicable. Here that dream of man which he calls by such names
as “heaven” or “happiness,” and which he has always sought in vain,
becomes not only a reality, but the only reality possible for him. For
nothing would be more terrible than endless happiness or a located
heaven.


II. STAGES OF ITS DEVELOPMENT

The history of the symphony is the history of all art. It moves in
cycles; it marks a parabola. It began as a naïve expression of feeling;
it learned little by little how to master its own working material,
and as it mastered that, it became more and more conscious in its
efforts; as soon as new instruments for producing it were perfected, it
immediately expanded its style to correspond to the new possibilities;
as its technique permitted, it continually sought to grasp more and
more of the elements of human life and human aspiration and to express
them. In Haydn we see it as naïve, folk-like, tuneful music, not highly
imaginative, smacking of the soil--like Burns, but without his deep
human feeling. In Mozart it reaches a stage of classic perfection
which may be compared to Raphael’s paintings. Hardly a touch of the
picturesque, the romantic, or the realistic mars its serene beauty; it
smiles on all alike; it is not for you or for me,--as Schumann is,--but
for every one. And being purely objective it belongs to no time and
lasts forever. And how delightful are Mozart’s digressions. He is
like Fielding, who, when he wants to philosophize about his story,
proceeds to write a whole chapter during which the action awaits the
philosopher’s pleasure. Later writers never drop the argument for a
moment; if there is a lull in the action it is somehow kept in complete
relation to the subject-matter. Mozart often enlivens you with a story
by-the-way, but he always manages to preserve the continuity of his
material. The difference between his method and that of Brahms, for
example, is like that between Fielding’s philosophic interlude chapters
in “Tom Jones” and Meredith’s “Our Philosopher,” who, looking down from
an impersonal height upon the characters in the story, interjects his
Olympian comment.

A new and terrific force entered music through Beethoven, new to
music, old as the human race--namely, the spirit of revolt. The world
is always the same. In its fundamentals, human life, within our
historical retrospect, remains what it was. An art takes what it can
master--and no more. Music was ready; the world was in a turmoil at
just that moment, and the result was what we call “Beethoven.” Mozart
was his dawn, Schumann and the other Romanticists his mysterious
and beautiful twilight. He himself represents at once the spirit of
revolution, that inevitable curiosity which such a period always
excites, and that speculative philosophy which tries to piece the
meaning of new things. The world was full of flame; battle thundered
only a few miles from Vienna; the spirit of equality and fraternity was
hovering in the air. Beethoven’s piercing vision compassed all this.
He sounded the triumph of the soul of man--as in the great theme at
the close of the Ninth Symphony; he took the simplest of common tunes
and made it glorious--as at the end of the “Waldstein” Sonata; his
imagination ranged at will over men struggling in death-grapple, over
the gods looking down sardonically on the spectacle. He was the great
protagonist of democracy, but he was also a great constructive mind. He
never destroyed anything in music for which he did not have a better
substitute, and there is hardly a note in his mature compositions that
is not fixed in nature.

This great force having spent itself, the art turns away and starts in
another direction--as it must. The lyric symphony of Schubert appears.
His was the most perfect song that ever asked for expression by the
orchestra. With small intellectual power, with but scanty education of
any sort, Schubert, by the very depth of his instinct, creates such
pure beauty as to make intellectualism seem almost pedantic. He strings
together melody after melody in “profuse, unmeditated art.” He was a
pendant to Beethoven, and often enough in listening to Schubert’s music
we catch the echo of his great contemporary. Then comes the so-called
“Romantic School” of Schumann with its tender, personal qualities, its
glamour, its roseate hues. Like all other romantic utterance it had a
certain strangeness, a certain detachment from reality, and a certain
waywardness which give it a bitter-sweet flavor of its own. Like all
other romantic utterance, too, it was impatient and refused to wait
the too-slow turning of the clock’s hands; it is the music of youth
and of hope. Its effect on the development of the symphony was slight.
It was ill at ease in the large spaces of symphonic form, for its hues
were too changing, its moods too shifting, to answer the needs of the
symphony. No really great symphonic composer appears between Schubert
and Brahms, but during that period the rich idiom of the Romantic
School had become assimilated as a part of the language of music.

Brahms using something of this romantic idiom, but having a broad
feeling for construction, and firmly grounded on that one stable
element of style, counterpoint, produced four symphonies worthy to
stand alongside the best. They are restrained in style, for Brahms has
something of that impersonality which is needed in music as much as in
other forms of art (and one may say, in passing, that the greatest of
all composers, Bach, is the most impersonal). The flexibility of the
language of music increased rapidly during the nineteenth century aided
by Wagner and the Romanticists, and in Brahms the symphony becomes less
didactic and more introspective. I may, perhaps, make the comparison
between music like his and that later stage of the English novel
wherein the author desires the action to appear solely as the result of
the psychology of the characters, and wherein, also, words are made
to answer new demands and serve new purposes. Brahms could not have
said what he did say had he been limited to the style of Mozart; nor
could Meredith had he been limited to the style of Thackeray. Brahms’s
symphonies, in consequence of the complicated nature of his style,
are not easily apprehended by the casual listener. Let a confirmed
lover of Longfellow, or even of Tennyson, take up for the first time
“Love in the Valley” and he will have the same experience. Every word
will convey its usual meaning to him, but the exquisite beauty of the
poem will elude him. He will go back to “My Lost Youth,” or to “Blow,
Bugles, Blow,” for healing from his bruises. Any one of my readers who
has access to Brahms’s First Symphony should examine the passage which
begins twenty measures before the _poco sostenuto_ near the end of the
first movement if he wished to understand something of Brahms’s powers
of re-creating his material. Here is a melody of great beauty which is
derived from the opening phrase of the symphony, and which has a bass
derived from the first theme of the first movement. As it originally
appeared it was full of stress as though yearning for an impossible
fulfillment. Here its destiny is at last attained, and the law of its
being fulfilled. Music progresses from one point of time to another.

Contemporaneous with Brahms stands Tschaikovsky to reveal how varied
are the sources of musical expression. No two great men could be
farther apart than these--one an eclectic, calm, thoughtful, and
impersonal, restraining his utterances in order to understate and
be believed; the other pouring out the very last bitter drop of his
unhappiness and dissatisfaction entirely unmindful of a world that
distrusts overstatement and has only a limited capacity for reaction
from a colossal passion. Of Tschaikovsky’s sincerity there is no doubt
whatever. He so believed; life was to him what we hear it to be in his
symphonies. But life is not like that. If it were we should all have
been destroyed long since by our own uncontrollable inner fires. So,
aside from any technical considerations,--and he contributed nothing of
importance to the development of the symphony,--Tschaikovsky represents
a phase of life rather than life itself. Dvořák’s “New World” Symphony
adds a new and interesting element to symphonic evolution. Dvořák was
like Haydn and Burns, a son of the people, and the themes he employs
in this symphony are essentially folk-melodies. But where Haydn merely
tells his simple story with complete unconsciousness of its possible
connection with life in general, Dvořák sees all his themes in their
deeper significance. The “New World” Symphony is a saga retold.

A new phase in the development of the symphony appears in César Franck,
whose musical lineage reaches back over the whole range of symphonic
development and beyond. His spirit is mediæval. In his one symphony
rhythm plays a lesser part, and one feels the music to be quite
withdrawn from the vivid movement of life, and to live in a realm of
its own. Franck was one of those rare spirits who remain untainted by
the world. His symphony is a spiritual adventure; other symphonies are
full of the actions and reactions of the real world in which their
composers lived. This action and reaction always depends for its
expression in music on the play and inter-play of rhythmic figures.
Franck’s symphony broods over the world of the spirit; his least
successful themes are those based on action.


III. CHAMBER MUSIC AS AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMPHONIES

My object in writing all this about the form and substance of the
symphony, and in drawing comparisons between it and the novel or
poetry, has not been to lead my readers to understand music through the
other arts, for _by themselves_ such comparisons are of small value.
I have dwelt on these common characteristics of the arts because they
exist, because they illuminate each other, and at the same time because
they are too little considered. The only way to understand music is
to practice it, or, failing that, to hear it under such conditions as
will permit a certain opportunity for reflection. We are incapable
of understanding symphonic music chiefly because we have so little
practice in doing so. An occasional symphony concert is not enough.
How shall this difficulty be overcome? There is a natural way out,
and it consists in what is called “chamber music.” A piece of chamber
music is a sort of domestic symphony. A string quartette, a pianoforte
or violin sonata, a trio, quartette, quintette, etc.,--these are all
little symphonies; the form is almost identical, the same devices of
rhythm, melody, harmony, counterpoint, and so forth, are employed. In
chamber music paucity of idea cannot be covered up by luxury of tone
color; everything is exposed; so that only the greatest composers have
written fine music in this form. Now, if in every community there
were groups of people who played chamber music together, and if these
would permit their friends to attend when they practice, the symphony
would soon find plenty of listeners. Such rehearsals would give an
opportunity to hear difficult passages played over and over again;
there would be time for discussion, and, above all, for reflection.
Every town and village should have a local chamber-music organization
giving occasional informal concerts. Under these circumstances a
sympathetic intimacy would soon be established between the performers
and listeners and the music itself. The inevitable and indiscriminate
pianoforte lesson is an obstacle to this much desired arrangement. Some
of our children should be taught the violin or the violoncello in
preference to the pianoforte. Then the family circle could hear sonatas
for violin and pianoforte by Bach, Mozart, Beethoven, or Brahms, and
would accomplish what years of attendance at symphony concerts could
not bring about. Chamber music has the great advantage of being simple
in detail; one can easily follow the four strands of melody in a string
quartette, whereas the orchestra leaves one breathless and confused.
The practice of chamber music by amateurs would be one of the very best
means of building up true musical taste. I cannot dwell too insistently
on the fact that the majority of those people who do not care for such
music would soon learn to care for it if they had opportunities to
listen to it under such conditions as I have described. The argument
proves itself, without the evidence--plentiful enough--of individuals
who have gone through the experience. Furthermore, by cultivating
music in this way, we should gradually break down some of the social
conditions which now operate against the art. If we all knew more about
it and loved it for itself, we should give over our present adulation
of technique. We should put the performer where he belongs as an
interpreter of a greater man’s ideas. By our uncritical adulations we
place him on far too high a pedestal.


IV. THE PERFORMER AND THE PUBLIC

I have spoken of certain social conditions which affect music
unfavorably. There has been always a certain outcry against music
because of its supposed emotionalism. The eye of cold intelligence,
seeing the music-lover enthralled by a symphony, raises its lid in icy
contempt for such a creature of feeling. The sociologist, observing
musical performers, wonders why music seems to affect the appearance
and the conduct of some of them so unfavorably. The pedagogue, who has
his correct educational formula which operates like an adding-machine,
and automatically turns out a certain number of mechanically educated
children, each with a diploma clutched in a nervous hand--he tolerates
music because it makes a pleasant break in diploma-giving at graduation
time, and because it pleases the parents. The business man leaves
music to his wife and daughters and is willing to subscribe to a
symphony orchestra provided he does not have to go to hear it play.
Now, if the sociologist would put himself in the place of the singer,
who, endowed by nature with a fine voice, is able, on account of a
public indifferently educated in music, to gain applause and an undue
source of money, even though he has never achieved education of any
sort whatever--if the sociologist would but think a little _about
sociology_, he would perhaps finally understand that he himself is very
likely at fault. For it is very likely that he knows almost nothing of
this art which is one of the greatest forces at his disposal. He is,
perhaps, one of the large number of persons who make musical conditions
what they are. Public performers are the victims, not the criminals. We
must remember of old how disastrous has been the isolation of any class
of workers from their fellows.

I have referred in this and in the preceding chapters to certain
unities in symphonic music--in its several elements of rhythm, melody,
and harmony, and in the whole. I have said that every object is unified
in itself, and that it is a part of a greater whole. In this sense a
symphony is a living thing; every member of it has its own function,
and contributes a necessary part to the whole. But is not this equally
true if we carry the argument into life itself and say: Here is a thing
of beauty created by man; it is a part of him--one of his star-gleams;
can he be complete if he loses it altogether? Can his spirit hope
for freedom if he depends on his mind alone? Is the satisfaction of
intellectual or material achievement enough? Would he not find in music
a realm where he would breathe a purer air and be happier because he
would leave behind him all those unanswerable questions which forever
cry a halt to his intelligence? Moral idealism is not enough for the
spirit of men and women, for, humanity being what it is, morality is
bound to crystallize into dogma. The Puritans were moral in their
own fashion, but they were as far away from what man’s life ought to
be--under the stars, and with the flowers blooming at his feet--as
were the gay courtiers whom they despised. Intellectual idealism is
not enough, because it lacks sympathy. We all need something that
shall be entirely detached from life and, at the same time, be wholly
true to it. Our spirit needs some joyousness which objects, ideas, or
possessions cannot give it. We must have a world beyond the one we
know--a world not of jasper and diamonds, but of dreams and visions.
It must be an illusion to our senses, a reality to our spirit. It must
tell the truth in terms we cannot understand, for it is not given to us
to know in any other way.

FOOTNOTE:

[12] The reason for this is one to which I referred in the chapter
on “The Opera”--namely, that a work of art must not overstrain the
capacities of those human beings for whom it was intended.




CHAPTER VIII

CONCLUSION


One of the most unfortunate conditions surrounding our musical life
is the small part men take in it. This is not altogether their fault.
Their business is engrossing, and concert-going is made difficult for
them. There should be some music for the business man between the time
when he leaves his office and the hour of his dinner, and it should
be so arranged as to cause him the minimum of trouble and give him
the maximum of enjoyment. This means a half-hour or forty minutes of
good music available, say, at five o’clock, and not too far away. It
means, also, that he shall be provided with a repetition of every long
or complicated composition so that he may have a chance to understand
it. The average listener hears a Brahms symphony once in, say, two or
three years, and there is little chance of his finding it intelligible.
No doubt, in course of time this will come about. No doubt, too,
workers in shops and offices will by and by be able to hear a little
really fine music at lunch time.[13] The influx of men into concert
rooms would be of great benefit to the cause of music, as well as to
the men themselves. We should, after a time, get rid of that curious
Anglo-Saxon idea that art is effeminate, and should begin to value it
for what it really is. Whenever I think of this mistaken notion the
figure of Michael Angelo rises before me. There was as heroic a man as
even the world of war ever produced; capable alike of the Herculean
task of the Sistine frescoes,--the actual physical labors of which
would kill an ordinary man (and Michael Angelo was then over sixty
years old),--of the heroic Moses, and again of that most tender and
beautiful of all sculpture, the Pietà; a stern and noble nature capable
of fighting for his principles no matter what the risk. Or I think
of Beethoven, ill, lonely, deaf, and poor, but nevertheless creating
virile music of the kind we know. Or of Bach, sturdy as an oak tree,
without recognition from the world, bringing up a large family on
almost nothing a year, wholesome, profound, and true--the equal in all
that goes to make a man of any “captain of industry,” any soldier, or
any statesman. These are the ones I should match men with. I would have
men listen to the strains of these composers, look at the works of that
colossal genius of Italy and ask themselves: Is art effeminate or am I
blind and deaf?

But men, having comparatively little leisure, cannot be expected to
waste it on sentimental music or on mere virtuosity. A violinist who
plays sweet little pieces, or who astonishes you by his technical
skill, should expect no response from human beings who are at work day
by day and hour by hour facing the hard facts of life. Men, dealing
with exact laws or under the necessities of trade and barter, are
forced to distinguish between true and false, between reality and
unreality, for their very existence depends on so doing. I do not mean
by this that these common experiences of men fit them to understand
great music, but I think men possess thereby a certain sense of values
and a certain discrimination between what is real and what is false,
and that a great piece of real music will find an answer in them. I
believe that the opera has much to do with the average man’s attitude
toward music. To spend from three to four hours in an overheated and
badly ventilated opera house after a day of business, and to listen to
the sort of hectic emotionalism which is common in opera is enough to
disgust the average business man with all music. How patient he is!
But Beethoven, who loved and hated, and suffered and triumphed, we can
all understand. When we come to listen to the opening of his violin
concerto, for example, we must all say: Here is a man. And when we
have compassed the whole of that great composition we shall learn to
say: Here is reality _turned true at last_. We shall then have learned
one of the great lessons that art teaches--namely, that there is
nothing in the world so heroic, so noble, or so profound but that its
qualities may be _increased_ by the imagination and the skill of the
great artist. For however profound a human emotion may be or however
noble a deed, it becomes more profound or more noble when it is seen in
relation to the whole of life and over a stretch of time. The artist
gives it true perspective, and enables us really so to see it. Dante
the poet is greater than Dante the lover.

But my plea that music should be made easy of access for men is
based chiefly on the fact that they need it. It is so easy for human
beings--men or women--to become completely submerged in the details
of life; and the round of daily acts and daily associations does,
in course of time, completely engulf many people, so that they only
catch glimpses of something beyond--glimpses of a promised land into
which they never enter. I can conceive almost any business as being
interesting in itself; the “game” of life has its own rewards; and
there is no trade, no profession, no business that does not offer some
play to the imagination. But every weight needs a counterbalance, and
every human being whose daily occupation is full of practical detail
must save himself or herself by some _equal force_ in the opposite
direction. The law is as old as life itself. The best preparation for
an education in engineering is a course in the classics, and the man
who grinds all things in the mill of business eventually goes into the
hopper himself.

But love of beauty is a secret and inviolate thing. Our tendency
to-day is to seek our salvation--of whatever kind--in the crowd. We
form literary and musical clubs, and drama leagues, and art circles
to accomplish what each person should do alone. This is an old human
fallacy. To attempt to be literary or artistic or socialistic or
religious by means of an organization is to waive the whole question.
There is only one way of being literary and that is to love good
literature and to read it in privacy; there is only one way to
understand the drama and that is to read by yourself the great plays
from Æschylus onward, and to see as many good plays as possible. I know
that it is impossible to hear the symphonies of Beethoven except with
some thousands of other people; nevertheless, you are yourself alone,
and, by yourself, you must solve the mystery. Never can there be a
more complete isolation of the individual than when, sitting with the
crowd, a piece of fine music begins. Never is your own individuality
so precious to you as then. Straight to your soul come these sounds,
automatically separating all the diviner part of you from the lower,
singling out what is commonly inarticulate and inchoate, and fanning
into life again that smothered spark which never wholly dies. How
impossible it is to look at pictures with other people. The mind
and the imagination demand freedom to wander at will, to ponder, to
speculate. What passes from the picture to you, and from you to the
picture, is a sort of trembling recognition, too delicate to be shared,
too intimate to be uttered. So it is with books. You need silence and
retirement so as to feel the perspective of knowledge, so that your
mind may wander through whatever courses open to it.

It has often been remarked that, in America, women have now both
leisure and independence to pursue the arts and to satisfy their desire
for what is called “culture,” and that in this respect they have taken
the place frequently occupied by men. The most characteristic element
in this situation is, however, that in the pursuit of intellectual or
artistic advancement, woman joins a club! These clubs are of very great
use to the individuals who belong to them and to the communities in
which they flourish when they undertake--as they frequently do--the
betterment of social conditions. Any one familiar with what they have
accomplished in this respect must pay them a real tribute. But in
their pursuit of “culture” they have been less successful, and for
the reasons already outlined here. They pursue too many subjects, and
they dissipate their energies. But above all, they seem unconscious
of the fundamental principle of education which is that one really
educates one’s self. For education, after all, consists in the gradual
enlargement of one’s own perceptions through coming in contact with
greater minds, and its processes are secret and intensely personal. As
you read “The Idiot,” for example, you connect Mishkin with Lohengrin,
Parsifal, the Arthurian legends, or even with Christ. The extraordinary
account of his thoughts as he falls in the epileptic fit, and his
use of the words, “And there was no more time,” bring up a whole
fascinating sequence of psychological speculations. The character of
Nastasya calls to your memory scores of other characters from Kundry
down to Sonia, and, as you read, the whole warp and woof of life, shot
through and through with its drab and scarlet, flashes before you.
Now, these contacts are as nothing if some one else makes them. The
spark must strike in your own imagination. You yourself must feel the
current of this magnetism which reaches from the earth to the stars
and makes all things akin. A good book should be a provocation to the
reader. A club for “culture” is a collection of human beings each
hoping for vicarious salvation through the other.

Women’s clubs not only waste energy in their pursuit of knowledge, but
they debilitate the intellectual strength of the individual woman.
Nothing could be worse for the mind than the peaceful acceptance of the
point of view of another without resistance and without the test of
your own thoughts and your own personality. Smatterings of knowledge
are almost useless. Nothing is yours until you make it so.


The relation between music and life is, then, an intimate and vital
relation. Any person, young or old, who does not sing and to whom music
has no meaning, is by just so much a poorer person in all that goes to
make life happy, joyous, and significant. Any community which employs
no form of musical expression is by just so much inarticulate and
disorganized as a community. Any church that buys its music and never
produces any of its own loses just so much in spiritual power.

We all need music because it is a fluent, free, and beautiful form
of expression for those deeper impulses of ours which are denied
expression by words. Our speech is too highly specialized; we
discriminate with words instead of with inflections and gestures; we
smother our natural expressiveness; we hold words to be synonyms of
thought, whereas thought is half feeling and instinct and imagination,
no one of which can really find issue in exact terms. All great
literature is inexact.

Music frees us. Not only does it let each of us say for himself what
he cannot say in words, but, at its best, it reveals to us a higher
reach of life, detached, yet a part of the inmost being of us all. When
we truly respond to it, there is set up in us a certain harmonious
vibration which tunes us to one another, to the mother earth, the
everlasting sea, and to that larger world of suns, stars, and planets
of which they are a part.

Nothing ever dies. What we call death is only a transformation from one
form of life to another. All the music that ever was still sounds; all
the music that is to be still slumbers. Life and death are one, and, in
the truest sense, the whole universe is a song.


THE END


FOOTNOTE:

[13] I do not mean a phonographic record of the tenor solo in “L’Elisir
d’Amore,” or anything of that sort. I mean something which will be more
than a casual moment’s entertainment.


The Riverside Press CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS U . S . A

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC AND LIFE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
